+++
title = "01 Devotional Possession in the Gītā and Ānandavardhana"

+++
Indian devotional (bhakti) literature is one of the most prominent genres for discussion of āveśa and allied notions of divine or oracular possession. Vallabhācārya (1479–1531) provides an epitome of this in his commentary on the Bhāgavata-Purāṇa (BhP 10.27.24),1 entitled “Subodhinī.” Vallabhācārya writes: bhagavadāveśo hi sarvajñatā bhavati (one who is in a state of divine possession becomes omniscient). Bhakti literature is also the most prominent locus for discussion of the aesthetics of possession, a topic that Vallabhācārya and his followers, as well as the Vaiṣṇava disciples of Śrī Caitanya, take up in full. The underlying bhakti context for these notions is established in the Bhagavad-Gītā (BhG), where Kṛṣṇa asserts that those whose “minds are absorbed in me” (mayy āveśya manaḥ; 12.2) are the best among yogins (yuktatamāḥ).2 Furthermore, Kṛṣṇa adds that he saves from the cycle of death and rebirth those whose “thoughts are absorbed in me” (mayy āveśya cetasām; 12.7).3 Later bhakti texts explicitly or implicitly follow the Gitā. For example, in the BhP Uddhava addresses Kṛṣṇa, in a statement that could easily be multiplied, “You, O Master, have said that the discipline of devotion [bhaktiyogaḥ], by which the mind, after eliminating all attachment, enters [āviśet] into you, is independent [of other disciplines]” (11.14.2). Bhakti theologians elaborate these statements, eventually expanding the domain of āveśa to include absorption in ontological states within the broad boundaries of saṃsāra, as well as in specified experiential states.

Ānandavardhana, in his great work on poetic theory, the Dhvanyāloka, presents a verse that reads in part:

I never found, O God recumbent on the Ocean, a joy like that which comes from love [bhakti] of thee (3.43).4

Abhinavagupta, commenting on this in his Locana, goes so far as to define bhakti in terms of possession or, in the translation of Ingalls et al., absorption: “bhakti is absorption (āvesa) in that (Lord) … whose nature is the highest form of the self, the essence of the universe, born of successive acts of worship preceded by faith, etc. Nothing is found equal to it, nor does anything resemble it.”5 One of the important features of North Indian bhakti theology, as already hinted, is its indebtedness to classical poetic theory (alaṃkāraśāstra). Absorption in certain highly specified moods (rasa) is the essence and goal of aesthetic experience, and bhakti was regarded by its advocates as a rasa or mood of compelling spiritual significance.6 Indeed, āvesa, rather than samādhi or any other term indicative of self-transcendence adopted from philosophical discourse, became perhaps the primary word for describing a devotional state. This exalted state of devotion retains an experiential component generally considered absent from the experience of samādhi. In the devotional experience of āveśa the experiencer is fully immersed in his or her beloved deity, yet still retains a relationship with that deity.

This sense of separateness within immersion represents the paradox of āveśa as a devotional state. In that state, any one of a number of rasas, particularly śṛṅgāra or erotically adorned love, is fully expressed in the personality and ahaṃkāra of the devotee, while (paradoxically again) leaving the “I” standing.7 Abhinavagupta distinguishes the experience of rasa from yogic experience. The former, in his view, partakes in a similar, corresponding, paradox, though he does not refer to it in these terms. In the experience of rasa, one is immersed in one’s own self (svātmānupravesāt) while fully engaging the subtle traces (vāsanā) of our inherent sense of love, among other sentiments (nijaratyādi-vāsanāveśavaśāt). In this statement, Abhinavagupta admits to a complex self (ātman), which is consistent with the self we are proposing as the operative Indic concept, after it is stripped of its thin veneer of institutional brahmanātman theological detritus. Abhinava is speaking not of devotional love or any other devotional state but of aesthetic experience in relation to poetry and drama. Nevertheless, the correspondence is clear and was taken up and adapted by later bhakti theologians, especially Vallabhācārya and the two Gosvāmīs, Rūpa and Jīva in the sixteenth century. This functional paradox, appropriately labeled bhedābheda (nondifference in difference) by the Gosvāmīs, was absent in yogic samadhi.8 Thus, in his own fashion, Abhinavagupta hints at a relationship between bhakti and āveśa that was already recognized in the BhP, though he appears to have arrived at this understanding independently of the latter, which hardly, if at all, figures in his work. However, succeeding generations of bhakti theologians were consciously indebted to the BhP for expressing this relationship in narrative discourse, as well as to Abhinavagupta for providing it, albeit independently, with a subtly nuanced analytical apparatus. It is this conjunction of rasa and bhakti that we discuss here.
