+++
title = "02 Vallabhācārya’s Concept of Āveśa"

+++
Vallabhācārya mentions āveśa in several brief works. His Nirodhalakṣaṇa,9 a text of twenty verses describing the symptoms (lakṣaṇa) of the highest devotional state (nirodha), contains the following verses: “Indeed, for the benefit of those whose senses have become defiled as a result of immersion in the world [saṃsārāveśa], [I declare that as a general principle] one should connect all the [sense] objects with Kṛṣṇa, the underlying omnipotent Lord. Worldly pain or separation cannot exist for those whose minds are always immersed in [āviṣṭa] the attributes of the destroyer of the demon Mura [viz. Kṛṣṇa]. Their joy is similar to that of Hari.”10 Similarly, in his own commentary, Prakasa, on the Śāstrārtha section (verse 53cd) of his Tattvārthadīpanibandha (Essay Illuminating the Nature of Truth), Vallabhācārya states that, for one in a state of divine possession (bhagavadavese), the Lord’s own attributes, such as pervasiveness, enter that person, even if the individual soul (jīva) is not itself all-pervasive.11 In the third verse of the Pañcapadyāni, a short text enumerating qualities of those who are best suited to listen profitably to the BhP, Vallabhācārya says: “Those who know, without doubt, Kṛṣṇa as He really is, believing with all the faculties of their heart, are restless either because of possession [āveśa] by the Lord or because of entering into the highest state of bhakti [nirodha], not otherwise.”

The most important Sanskrit commentator on Vallabhācārya, Puruṣottama (mid-seventeenth century), says on a passage from the Bālabodha, a brief tract placing Vallabhācārya’s philosophy in the context of competing systems of thought, that the Supreme Absolute, parabrahman, has entered (āveśya) various ṛṣis in order to compel them to expound different philosophies.12 For example, claims Puruṣottama, parabrahman as Nārāyaṇa caused Nārada to become possessed (āveśita) so that he would compose Pāñcarātra texts. In the Saṃnyāsanirṇaya, a brief work describing renunciation driven solely by unbearable longing for the Lord, Vallabhācārya says, “There can never be āveśa of Hari of bodies that are overcome by sense objects.”13 In his Subodhinī on the BhP, Vallabhācārya refers to the svāminīs (viz. gopīs) immersion in Kṛṣṇa’s creative love games (līlā) as līlāveśa.14 One final reference may be given, out of the dozens of occasions Vallabhācārya uses the word āveśa. In the Subodhinī, Vallabhācārya cites a verse explaining that if the Lord completely possesses one’s thoughts (cittāveśaḥ) as a result of remembrance of His name and attributes (smaraṇa), Viṣṇu will undoubtedly grant enlightenment (mokṣa).15 Vallabhācārya articulates this as part of a three-stage process: seeking (anveṣaṇam), absorption into the Lord’s līlās (līlāveśa), and omniscience (bhagavadāveśa). This indicates reciprocity: first, the bhakta enters the Lord’s līlā, then the Lord enters the bhakta. The realization of these latter two stages is represented in the Subodhinī by the twofold initiation into the Puṣṭimārga mantras, the first consisting of eight syllables (aṣṭākṣara), the second of five (pañcākṣara).

Vallabhācārya’s Nirodhalakṣaṇa, verses 17–19, addresses the importance of total sensory commitment to the Lord’s sevā or fully embodied performative service. Not only should all the sense organs contribute, but so should certain bodily functions that are rarely mentioned in this context. The verses translate:

After undertaking a commitment to perform the Lord’s sevā [tatra], one should always meditate on the form of Hari. [Just as] it is clear that [the faculties of] seeing and touching [should be used in service of the Lord], similarly this should always be the case for [the faculties of] construction and locomotion [making and going, i.e. the hands and feet]. [The functions of] hearing and speaking are [also] clear [in that they are used for listening to and narrating the stories of the Lord]. The faculty of sexual enjoyment [rati] can be used [similarly] in [producing] a son who is beloved of the Lord. [And] by discharging impure material from the excretory organ, a condition [of good health] supportive [śeṣabhāvam] [to the performance of sevā] is brought to the body. On the other hand, an organ which is clearly not seen to be used for the Lord’s service should decisively be brought under complete control.16

Puruṣottama emphasizes that this verse describes bhagavadāvesa, possession by the Lord. If a person possesses all the qualities of the divine, then that person is worthy of being treated as divine. These archetypal qualities (guṇas) that achieve full perfection in the “person” of the lord are majesty (aisvarya), potency (virya), glory (yasas), beauty (sri), knowledge (jñāna), and dispassion (vairāgya).17 The nature of this possession is illustrated by the maxim (nyāya) of fire and an iron ball (vahnyayogolakanyāya). If an iron (ayas) ball (golaka) is thrown into the fire (vahni), it becomes fiery. By taking on the guṇas of the Lord, an individual can actually become divine. Puruṣottama refers here to Brahmasutra 3.3.20, sambandhād evam anyatrāpi, and Vallabhācārya’s Aṇubhāṣya on it,18 which states explicitly that in performing the proper spiritual practice one takes on or becomes possessed by the characteristics of the Lord, like the iron ball coming in contact with fire.19 Puruṣottama states in his Bhāṣyaprakāśa on this sūtra that it is the Lord who possesses the bhakta, not the reverse, and as a result some of the Lord’s attributes manifest in the devotee.20

Thus, Vallabhācārya uses āveśa in several related senses: the Lord and his attributes entering and pervading a devotee, the devotee entering the Lord or his līlās, or the supreme brahman pervading an individual. In addition, thoughts can be pervaded and an individual can become completely immersed in the world (saṃsāra). Indeed, saṃsārāveśa (possessed by the cycle of birth and death) is a common term in texts of the Vallabha tradition (sampradāya). Thus, as in the compounds līlāveśa, saṃsārāveśa, and other frequently attested terms such as akṣarāveśa (absorbed in the absolute), the Vallabha sampradāya employs the word āveśa to indicate immersion in existential or psychological states. It is important to note that, in the Vallabha sampradāya and other North Indian bhakti traditions, āveśa indicates an intensity of engagement, a state clumsily regarded (or disregarded) as “emotionalism” by countless scholars and commentators. It is this intensity that sets bhakti apart from full partnership in the ethos of control advanced by previous incarnations of systematic brahmanical thought. It is not that bhakti is not brahmanical—far from it. But it participates equally in a “vernacular” ethos thinly veiled by both the obvious Sanskritization of vernacular narrative in texts, such as the BhP, and the proliferation of an experientially based vocabulary in regional Indic languages. This includes the extensive use of āveśa and, in South Indian Tamil devotional poetry, of the word aruḷ indicating, as Handelman and Shulman have shown, “‘possession’—a presence intensified beyond bearing—or the experience of the deity’s true (nija, aghora) form.”21 As is clear from investigations in earlier chapters, these represent strong continuities from the Ṛgveda and the early and medieval Tamil poems, which must be regarded as vernacular and orthodox.
