+++
title = "03 Śrī Caitanya and the Gauḍīya Concepts of Āveśa, Avatāra, and Multiple Bodies"

+++
The material on āveśa in the Gauḍīya (Bengali) tradition of Kṛṣṇa bhakti is equally rich and is consistent with these findings. I shall briefly examine a few passages from the works of Jīva and Rūpa Gosvāmī, the two greatest disciples and successors of Śrī Caitanya (1486–1533). One of the important and unique uses of āveśa in this tradition, explicated by Rūpa, occurs in the term āveśāvatāra. Avatāras may be either full or partial “descents” or appearances of the Lord in the world, manifested for the purpose of performing a specific action or series of actions. Rūpa’s Saṃkṣepa-Bhāgavatāmṛta (Concise Nectar of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa) catalogues various types of avatāras. Āveśāvatāras are, in the words of S. K. De, “not real Avatāras but Avatāras by analogy; because here the Lord enters into particular Jīvas and thus exalts them into Avatāras.”22 These avatāras share the essence of the Supreme Lord (svarūparūpa), but possess only a fraction of his power (śakti). Jīva Gosvāmī, one generation after Rūpa, refines Rūpa’s views in his Śrīkṛṣṇasandarbha. According to Jīva, various sages are “in possession” (āvesa) of different aspects of the Lord’s power: his jñānaśakti or power of knowledge, his bhaktiśakti or power of devotion, and his kriyāśakti or power of action. Occasionally, adds Jīva, a special devotee is possessed wholly by the Lord (svayamāvesa).23

The earliest available account of the life of Śrī Caitanya, perhaps composed during his lifetime, is the Sanskrit Caitanyacaritāmṛta by Murārigupta. Murāri reports that, at various moments in his life, Caitanya revealed himself as an āveśāvatāra of Kṛṣṇa, based on his experiences of āveśa of Varāha, Nṛsiṃha, and Saṃkarṣaṇa.24 Śrī Caitanya’s frequent bouts of divine intoxication resembled states of madness or possession, reminiscent of such accounts in ethnographies. One such account is recorded in a later vernacular Caitanyacaritāmṛta, this one the better-known Bengali version by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, completed by 1615. This text records that on Vijayadaśamī, the festival day on which Rama’s victory over the demon king Rāvaṇa is celebrated, while Caitanya’s disciples acted out the roles of Hanumān’s monkey-soldiers, Śrī Caitanya himself “was inspired with the spirit of the devoted Hanumanta [hanumān avese]. And so he took branches and felt as if he was on the wall of Lanka and was about to break it down. For he cried out in rage [krodhāvese], ‘Where art thou, O Ravana? Thou hast stolen the Mother of the world, so I shall kill thee with all my kinsmen.’”25 In view of these accounts, the question may be posed whether other experiences of āveśa by individuals without biographers who lived in times much more remote to twentieth-century ethnography and linguistic idiom might also have resembled spirit or deity possession in forms recognizable from ethnographies. We will return to this question in the conclusions, but for the moment we can say that there appear to be continuities, though different social, cultural, and sectarian conditions forced differences as well.

Just as āveśa of the Lord or of his exemplary devotees, the denizens of Vraja, indicates to Vallabhācārya an exalted state of grace, the followers of Caitanya also maintain that “[p]erfection, or salvation, is … understood as total absorption (āvesa) in an eternal body which resides in Vraja.”26 This is to be accomplished by rāgānugābhakti-sādhana, “devotional practice in which one imitates the passion (of the denizens of Vraja in their archetypal relationships with Kṛṣṇa).” This is described at length by David Haberman and involves “total identification with and absorption in (āveśa) the world of the dramatic character.”27 These characters include several of Kṛṣṇa’s associates mentioned in the BhP, especially as they are represented in dramatic performances such as Kṛṣṇa līlās. It is such “identification with and absorption in” characters known, studied, and felt that offers the devotee an opportunity of ecstatic participation in the Lord’s līlās. In his Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu (1.2.272), Rūpa states that this ecstatic participation is passion (rāga) of the highest absorption (paramāviṣṭatā), because this is Kṛṣṇa’s own true passion.28

The related notions of possession and embodiment are confronted in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school not only in its doctrines of avatāra and āveśa but also in a doctrine of multiple embodiment. Avatāra, as we have seen, has many (indeed, innumerable possible) gradations and types of manifestation, all emanating from the top down, from Kṛṣṇa’s own unimaginable motivations and actions. We also saw that the devotee, the bhakta, is capable of exploring these nuances from the bottom up, so to speak; this is one of the possibilities of bhakti-induced āveśa. In an environment in which manifestations and degrees of divinity are matters of doctrine, it is not surprising that humans too are empowered to explore and occupy multiple bodies. In the version of the doctrine fixed by Rūpa Gosvāmī in the Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu and the commentaries on it, the physical body is called the sādhaka-deha or sādhaka-rupa. It is this body that is visible to others. But advanced devotees are able to perform divine service (sevā) not just with their physical bodies but with their meditative bodies (siddha-rūpa, siddha-deha) as well.29 Haberman describes the siddha-rūpa as:

the eternal body one is to inhabit at the end of sādhana when perfection (siddha) has been attained.… [I]t is also the body the practitioners conceive of themselves as occupying during the sādhana—that is, during the meditative practices, worship, etc.… The body that one meditates in will be the very body that one resides in eternally after death.30

He further cites Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary on Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu, in which siddha-rūpa is glossed as “an inwardly conceived body that is useful for performing service to Kṛṣṇa in the manner one desires” (1.2.295).31

The most striking consequence of this belief is the male practice of dressing as a woman in performing personal or public sevā. This cross-dressing enables male bhaktas to self-identify more closely with the milkmaids (gopis), the ideal people. This, they believe, intensifies the quality of their devotion and allows them to become more seamlessly possessed of the gopī with whom they feel an affinity. This practice, Haberman says, was never particularly common, though anyone who spends much time in Braj will occasionally see such devotees. The self-identification can be so strong, the devotion so single-minded, that the devotee truly believes he is performing his sevā, singing, dancing, or chanting, with his siddha-rūpa, though others can see only the sādhaka-rūpa. This has parallels with festival possession examined earlier from the ethnographies in Tamilnadu, Tulunad, Kerala, Garhwal, Assam, and elsewhere. Although the possession here is not oracular, it is, like the others, bhakti-induced and notably ecstatic. And, like a few of the others, it encourages gender interchangeability.32 The difference is that the present tradition is robustly Sanskritic—representing a departure from what we find in South India, Garhwal, and so on, which are traditions transmitted beyond the pale of Sanskritic culture. Although it is uncertain whether the cross-dressing is mentioned in any Sanskrit text,33 strongly suggesting that it was originally a local non-orthodox practice, the Bhaktirasāmṛtasindhu (1.2.294–295) appears to know and condone this practice when it states that a practitioner of rāgānugābhakti-sādhana who strongly desires such an emotional experience (tadbhāva) should remember Kṛṣṇa and his various stories and exploits, intensely identify with the resident of Vraja (viz. a gopī) who is most beloved (preṣṭha) to him, then imitate that person with both his sādhaka-rūpa and his siddha-rūpa. I deal further with this cultural dynamic between folk and classical, this “vernacularization” of Sanskrit traditions, in the general conclusions in Chapter 13.

The following story further augments the relationship between devotional self-identification and possession. This extraordinary account is found in the commentary by Priyā Dās, written in 1712, with further elucidations by subcommentators, on Nabhadas’s Bhaktamāl. In this account of the performance of a Kṛṣṇa līlā near Puri, the actor playing the role of Narasiṃha, the man-lion incarnation of Viṣṇu, became so engrossed in, or possessed by, the character he was playing that he actually killed and eviscerated the actor playing the demon-king Hiraṇyakaśipu, an avowed enemy of Viṣṇu. In order to prove that the actor was himself innocent, and not personally responsible for the murder, he was asked by the court to take the role of Daśaratha, the father of Rāma, in another līlā. Following the story line of the Rāmāyaṇa, the actor, so engrossed in—or possessed by—his character, attained such a degree of sorrow at Rama’s exile that he actually died of grief during the performance, thus proving his innocence.34 As if once were not enough, Sarah Caldwell states that, at several temples at the other end of India, in Kerala, “we were told legends of the accidental murder of the actor playing Dārika by the actor playing Kāḷi, who lost control and became too strongly identified with his bloodthirsty heroine.”35 In these accounts we find a clear lack of distinction between spirit or deity possession, intense absorption in emotion, and acting.36 Perhaps the point is not to distinguish them, but to recognize that they share certain features and are identified in a similar manner, with similar vocabulary, by the indigenous culture. Some of the repercussions of this are explored below.
