+++
title = "04 Āveśa and Bhāva"

+++
In view of these accounts of possession in the performances of the Kṛṣṇa and Rām līlās, can we ask whether the equivalent of “dramatic possession” is found in Sanskrit theater? The answer appears to be a qualified “yes.” We should be careful, however, not to confuse possession with other altered states. For example, in Kalidasa’s rendition of the tale of Purūravas and Urvaśī, Purūravas wanders about in a state of madness born of extreme longing for his beloved Urvaśī, who had disappeared in a sage’s garden (Vikramorvaśīya, Act 4). Although one can say that Purūravas is possessed with longing for Urvaśī and that he exhibits many of the same mental and physical symptoms of spirit or deity possession, he cannot be possessed in the sense being addressed here. Kālidāsa likely would have called it āvesa, praveśa, and so forth had he intended it in the primary meanings discussed here. Nevertheless, the proximity of Purūravas’s experience demonstrates that it is probably unwise to label an experience “possession” unless the sources provide direct support. Sanskrit texts tend to be precise to a fault, even if interpretation is occasionally warranted. In spite of frequent self-censorship of possession and emotion in general, especially in the colonial period, as discussed earlier, most Sanskrit authors, especially dramatists, poets, and redactors of religious and secular tales, had the means to point the reader in that direction.

It is important at this point to enquire about whether, or indeed the degree to which, the imitation participates in the essence or quintessence of possession. In support of Kalidasa’s Purūravas, we again turn to Vallabhācārya. He asks in the second verse of his brief Nirodhalakṣaṇa: “Will the Lord bestow on me that pleasure that the gopis as well as all the residents of Vraja enjoyed in Gokula?” Puruṣottama, commenting on this, invokes the “maxim of delirium resulting from deep attachment” (āsaktibhramanyāya). As a result of deep attachment and longing, it is possible to become delirious and behave as if one is really in the presence of the longed-for individual. Puruṣottama cites the classic example of the longing of the milkmaids after the disappearance of Kṛṣṇa from the great circle dance (rāsalīlā; BhP 10.29–33). After Kṛṣṇa disappears, one of the milkmaids begins playing with her comrades, acting as if she were herself Kṛṣṇa and they were Yasodā. Following her example, the others reciprocate. To whatever extent this might be drama or ritual, complicating the balance of spontaneity and control, the point is that it was enacted in order to help disclose their bhāva or emotional state. The gopis were not, of course, Kṛṣṇa and Yasodā, at least in their occupations as milkmaids, nor are they explicitly described as entering into states of possession. But their mental states so closely resemble possession states that they are referred to as bhāvāveśa or līlāveśa. And in this way they became Kṛṣṇa and Yaśodā, at least temporarily.

In this way, āveśa becomes closely connected with bhāva. The latter has the general meaning of “becoming, existing, a state of being” but more generally indicates “nature, condition, emotion, mood, experience.”37 It is “as much an emotional as a cogitative state and is not ideational at all.”38 It is the word usually employed when speaking of devotional experience, emotion, absorption, a state of being.39 Bhakti poets speak of bhāva, in which the devotee partakes of the nature of the deity, in terms akin to possession, including entry, immersion, ecstasy, insanity, and loss of self-consciousness. The following passages from the BhP illustrate the proximity of āveśa to bhāva. In the eponymous Bhramara-Gīta (BhP 10.47), the gopīs praise a black bee (bhramara) said to be the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, in disguise. Kṛṣṇa responds: “Having totally immersed [āveśya] your mind, which is completely devoid of [other] tendencies, in me, meditating uninterruptedly on my form [anusmarantyaḥ], you will soon come to me.”40 This is nearly identical to BhG 12.2 and other passages cited above, but an experiential means, cognitive operation, or mood—in other words a bhāva—is indicated here. Bhāva, then, indicates that an immersion into an experience, an āvesa, has already occurred. In the rāsalīlā section of the same book (skandha) of the BhP, Kṛṣṇa explains to the gopīs that “bhāva of me results from hearing [my praises], seeing [me], meditating [on me], and singing [about me], not from close physical proximity to me” (BhP 10.29.27).41

The difference between āveśa and bhāva seems to be that āveśa is a state of “open” absorption, in that the elements of the experience as well as the identity of the experiencer can shift in different directions, while bhāva denotes a specific experiential state in which the identity of the experiencer is not necessarily threatened. In bhakti-induced āveśa, the very self-identity of the experiencer is reconstituted by the Lord’s presence and bliss as the devotee “comes to” the Lord, which in the case of the BhP implies entrance into the Lord’s līlā (divine play). Bhakti induced bhāva, in contrast, is a mood that allows the devotee to experience grace, in this case Kṛṣṇa’s, while not necessarily entering into the creative forces (or līlā) that inhere in that grace. Another passage in the BhP describes āveśa as a liberating condition, something that cannot necessarily be said of bhāva: “Even while engaged in action, one whose thoughts are absorbed [āviṣṭacittaḥ] in your lotus feet—hearing, reciting, contemplating, and causing others to remember [saṃsmarayan] your auspicious names and forms—is not destined for rebirth” (10.2.37). Bhāva, an “emergent mood”42 engendered by devotional absorption, is characterized by a depth of mood familiar to āvesa. However, āveśa is a deeper and more generalized experience that can be induced only by more advanced devotees. Anyone may experience bhāva, but very few can experience true āvesa.

An illuminating description of this distinction may be found not in a Sanskrit text but in the Bengali Kathāmṛta, the biography of the nineteenth-century saint Ramakrishna, by “M” (Matsyendranath Gupta). It is striking that Ramakrishna’s frequent states of divine intoxication resonate with those of Śrī Caitanya (a fact that Ramakrishna himself did not fail to notice—indeed, he claimed to be an incarnation of Śrī Caitanya). In this text the terms bhāva and āveśa are brought together in an example of a usage that is still attested in contemporary North Indian spiritual discourse.43 Jeffrey Kripal notes that the Kathāmṛta records Ramakrishna as bhāvāviṣṭha (established in ecstasy) and samādhiṣṭha (established in union).44 Kripal has not fully grasped the distinction between the two. In fact bhāvāviṣṭha is better translated as “immersed in bhāva” (āviṣṭha here should be read as āviṣṭta)45 or “possessed by divine experience.” The Kathāmṛta describes Ramakrishna’s states of ecstasy in the following terms: “When Ramakrishna is in samādhi, his body becomes motionless, his eyes and lips are parted slightly in pleasure, his lips are sealed in a smile. In bhāva, on the other hand, he can move, even dance, and his lips are free to talk, even if his speech is garbled in its ecstatic drunkenness.”46 In this text, at least, āveśa and samādhi are implicitly equated and are distinguished from bhāva, which is clearly an ecstatic state coincident with ordinary relational activity.

It is not without interest that the term bhāvāveśa appears perhaps as early as the seventh century, in the farcical drama Mattavilāsa, supposedly composed by the Pallava king Mahendravarman, also the reputed author of the Bhagavadajjukā. In the prologue, the sūtradhāra introduces a besotted tantric skull-bearer (kapālī) as one whose pilgrimage through the three worlds is characterized by many moods (rasa) as a result of immersion in (divine) experience (bhāvāveśavaśād).47 The state of bhāvāvesa in the Mattavilasa is similar to Ramakrishna’s bhāvāviṣṭ(h)a in that the bhāva is the experiential state, while the āveśa is the means by which it is experienced. In other words, āveśa here denotes a process that also helps to define an experiential state.
