+++
title = "05 Āveśa, Bhāva, and Alternative Vedāntas"

+++

In this connection, it is relevant to reprise an observation by A. K. Ramanujan on Nammāḻvār, the great Tamil saint whose poetry predates by several centuries the works of Vallabhācārya and Rūpa Gosvāmī. Nammāḻvār “speaks frequently of being entered, filled, taken over, enslaved as well as enabled by a divine being,”48 characteristics of possession found in contemporary ethnographies. Although Nammāḻvār wrote in Tamil, this description could be extended to many Sanskrit authors. In this way, bhāva adds a dimension of emotional intensity to the Vedic āvesa, in which the (ostensible) instigator is not the possessor but the one being possessed. Āveśa and bhāva tew appear to share this feature, except that bhāva adds a dimension of emotional clarity and direction to the āvesa.

One of the characteristic features of “alternative” advaita theologies—including the viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified nondualism) of Rāmānuja, the śuddhādvaita (pure nondualism) of Vallabhācārya, and the acintyabhedabheda (inconceivable nondifference in difference) of Śrī Caitanya and his disciples—is that the universe and the Lord are held to be equally real and equally absolute.49 This may be seen in the sense of identification of the sādhaka-rupa and the siddha-rupa in rāgānugabhakti-sādhana described above and in Vallabhācārya’s assertion that an image or (otherwise considered) representation of Kṛṣṇa is not a representation of the Supreme Lord, but his actual embodied form (svarupa). This continuum of reality from the absolute to the relative introduces one of the problematic issues involved in possession. If the universe is held to be false (mithya) or illusory (māyā), or as matter and spirit ontologically and phenomenologically separate, then any animation, any discernible sign of life may be construed as spirit animating, taking control of, possessing matter. This would be similar to cases we have discussed, in which brahman possesses intrinsically inert, insentient, imagined, and thoroughly malleable form, or puruṣa animates prakṛti but remains ever distinct from it. The corpse of the dead king Amaruka is just that—a corpse, dead, inert, insentient, devoid of divine essence, a mere product fortuitously placed. In this way, all life is nothing but possession—the “natural” interpenetration of spirit and matter—and phenomena otherwise regarded as possession are little more than embellishments on that theme, a more nuanced or higher order of possession. Irrespective of how such a general notion might interact with formal philosophical doctrine, most possession accounts in religious literature and Sanskrit fiction endorse this separation, at least for dramatic or narrative purposes. Indeed, the dramatic gravity of accounts of possession in the Upaniśads, the Kathāsaritsāgara, and the MBh, for example, would be severely diminished if this ontological gap were not assumed.

However, in Vallabhācārya’s suddhādvaita the entire universe is divinized; brahman, always called akṣarabrahman in the Vallabha school, is regarded as the body of Kṛṣṇa. Thus the Lord cannot interpenetrate with the universe as a separate insentient entity. Furthermore, all beings (jīvas) are regarded as particles of the Lord (bhagavadaṃśa), thus the nature of their relationship with akṣarabrahman is similar to that of the Lord himself. Just as embodiment is divinized, āveśa is, in the idiom readily employed in the texts of the Vallabha school, ādhidaivikī (divine), rather than ādhibhautikī (worldly). This distinction may be useful with respect to the material reviewed here: ādhidaivikī possession must bear the extra weight of special philosophical or theological context, while ādhibhautikī possession, devoid of this weight, has greater narrative and dramatic freedom. The former is limited to certain highly developed bhakti contexts (it is doubtful that devotional possession noted by anthropologists, for example, that described by Caldwell, Vogt, or Sax, would be situated in theological contexts similar to that of Vallabhācārya), while the latter dominates elsewhere, including that described in the Upaniṣads, the MBh, yoga, and the medical literature.

The devotional context of āveśa would not be complete without looking at related uses of the central concept of bhakti, namely love, applied in human situations, in which devotional love is also arguably manifest. Hara cites several relevant passages from the Kathāsaritsāgara (KSS) in which āveśa is linked with the word smara (erotic love): e.g., smarāviṣṭa (possessed by erotic love; KSS 81:55); smarajvarāveśavivaśa (in a swoon as a result of possession by lovesickness; KSS 119.156); ārūḍhasmarāveśa (overcome by sexual conquest; KSS 65.230).50 The Prakrit drama Karpūramañjari (2.1) by Rājasekhara (c. 900 C.E.) also employs the word āvesaṃ as “amorous passion.” In the Rāmāyaṇa (5.1.33) we also find the expression vīryam āviveśa (possessed by virility). The meanings of Tamil aṇaṅku (“woman” and “possession”) were occasionally conflated. Burrow states, “Sexual desire and lovesickness can also be regarded as a kind of possession and be denoted by the word aṇaṅku.” He provides the following verse: “They say that infatuation with deceiving women for those devoid of discriminating knowledge is possession by an evil spirit” (āyum aṟiviṉar allārkk aṇaṅk eṉpa / māyar makaḷir mayakku / Kuṟaḷ 918).51 The valorization of evil and diminution of women displayed here is not shared in most of these texts. Nevertheless, these terms share syntactical territory with English expressions such as “possessed by an idea” and “possessed by a desire.” Neither the English nor the Sanskrit are “possession” in the sense strictly applied by anthropologists, but they express a pressing immediacy, a passion or passionate intent, which are indicative of the category of possession attested in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Tamil texts, and apparently in English as well.
