+++
title = "04 Other Indic Demonologies"

+++
I have limited the above critique to medical texts because Weiss and Clifford have offered the most important theoretical contributions to the consideration of negative possession in South Asia available to date, and they both do so in the context of classical medical texts. However, bhūtavidyā has a broad panorama in South Asian culture, and much of it lies in areas peripheral to these texts. Therefore, in the interest of providing a more complete portrait of negative possession in South Asia, let us consider a few other demonologies, from both texts and ethnographies.

The large number of demonologies in Indian literature and culture vary greatly in content, by region, and according to genre. And, as is the case with demonologies found in first-millennium texts, the lists cannot be called fixed or stable. It is certain that different informants from the same area, cultural, or textual tradition offer different lists. It is outside the scope of this volume, indeed it would be impossible, to attempt to relate them all systematically.139 However, a brief précis of this ever-shifting terrain is relevant to illustrating “traditions” of bhūtavidyā. This is best managed by presenting several examples out of what are unquestionably dozens of demonologies, or even hundreds if one considers the idiosyncratic views of one or two texts or religious authorities.140 Thus, we briefly examine five demonologies, presented chronologically: (1) the list contained in the Bower manuscript; (2) the list presented in the Isanasivagurudevapaddhati; (3) a list found in the Madanamahārṇava, a text on karmavipāka (karmic ripening); (4) a list presented in an ethnographic account of healers in Varanasi; and (5) an account of a demonology found among the Divehi of the Maldive islands.141

## The Bower Manuscript
The Bower manuscript is so-called because it was sold to a British lieutenant named Hamilton Bower while he was staying at Kuqa, an old Silk Road trading stop on the northern rim of the Taklamakan desert in northwest China, in 1890, while engaged in a desperate search for the murderer of another British soldier. The manuscript consists of seven fragments, including three on āyurvedic medicine, two on divination with dice, and two on incantations to combat snakebite, all dating from the late fourth or early fifth centuries C.E.142 This is later than Caraka and Susruta, and, in one of the incantations against snakebite, it provides a list of twenty-one types of seizure (grahāto) caused by various ethereal beings. The list appears as part of a long mantra called mahāmāyūrī (the great peacock); indeed, the peacock has long been regarded as a consumer of poison. In this Buddhist text, the Blessed One (bhagavaṃ) recites the mahāmāyūrī for the benefit of his disciple Ānanda, who is instructed to use it to cure the mendicant Svāti, who had been bitten by a large black snake (mahatā kṛṣṇasarpena). In addition to serving as an antidote to snakebite, this mantra mentions other uses for it, including against seizures.143 These are “seizure [grahāto] by a deity [deva], a serpent [or chthonic] spirit [naga], a titan [asura], a god or spirit of the wind [maruta], a sky spirit [garuḍa],144 a celestial musician [gandharva], a horse-headed spirit [often under the control of Kubera] [kinnara], the spirit of a great serpent [mahoraga], a semidivine protective spirit [yakṣa], a demon [rākṣasa], a spirit of the dead that has not received full [or any] post-mortem rituals or offerings [preta], a flesh-eating demon [piśāca], a ghost [bhūta], demons with jar-shaped testicles [kuṃbhāṇḍa], a foul smell or foul-smelling spirit [pūtana],145 the spirit of a negligent kṣatriya [kaṭapūtana], a childsnatcher [skanda], madness [unmāda], a shadow spirit perhaps causing nightmares [ chāyā],146 convulsions [apasmāra], and the evil eye [ostāraka].”147

Among these, the maruta, garuḍa, kinnara, kuṃbhāṇḍa, pūtana, kaṭaputana, chāyā, ostāraka, as well as the unmāda and apasmāra, are themselves kinds of grahas and are not found in the earlier lists, though certainly most of these were known from other contexts. Maruta and garuḍa are included because they explicitly suggest airborne grahas;148 kuṃbhāṇḍa is likely a local attempt to make sense of the words kuṣmāṇḍa or khārkhōda; kinnara and pūtana are known in Purāṇic lists, the MBh, and elsewhere; kaṭapūtana is mentioned in Manu (12.71);149 and the latter four, chāyā, ostāraka, as well as unmāda and apasmāra, are clearly reifications of their literal significations. This testifies to the geographic range of Indic demonologies, which were shared by Buddhists and the medical traditions of Central Asia and the Silk Road.

## The Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati (ĪŚP)

The twelfth-century ĪŚP contains four chapters (paṭalas 41–44) on disease-inducing possession, specifically on childsnatchers (bālagrahas), behavior of the possessed (grahaceṣṭā), exorcism (bhūtabādha),150 and seizure disorder (apasmāra), respectively.151 As mentioned earlier, this text was quite popular in certain circles of medical and tantric practitioners in Kerala. The first thirty-six verses of paṭala 42 succinctly identify eighteen specific types of graha. This paṭala also links other grahas with the four varṇa-groupings, provides succinct descriptions of humoral imbalances complicit in possession, and offers a description of apasmāra. Because of its brevity and usefulness as a twelfth-century tantric point of comparison with the language of possession and identity of grahas found in classical āyurvedic texts, it is relevant to translate these verses.

1–3.Eighteen kinds of graha take hold of people: (1) nisteja, (2) deva, (3) asura, (4) nāga, (5) yakṣa, (6) gandharva, (7) rakṣas, (8) pitṛ, (9) heḍhra, (10) bhasma, (11) yonyudbhava, (12) kasmalaka, (13) pralāpa, (14) vighna, (15) kuśa, (16) antya, (17) piśāca, and (18) bhūta. All of these, as well as brahman and other [varṇa-based] rākṣasas that are complicit in madness [unmāda] and convulsions [apasmāra], and that desire sacrifice [balikāmāḥ], sex [ratikāmāḥ], or killing [hantukāmāḥ] grab hold of men.152 They may be divided into two categories: gentle [saumya] and fiery [āgneya].

4–5a.These grahas reside in empty places, lakes, wells, mountains, gardens, rivers, individual trees in cremation grounds, as well as in Buddhist and Hindu temples [caityadevālayādiṣu].

5b–8b.They afflict [pīdayanti] people who are angry, excited, laughing, afraid, alone at night; are either in a state of impurity, ostentatiously attired, or gain or lose money at night; those who are separated [from their loved ones] or about to die; women who are naked, pregnant, ill-behaved, in the course of having their menstrual period, have bathed immediately after the cessation of their period [thus preparing for sexual intercourse], have just given birth, are afflicted by lust, are drinkers of liquor or eaters of parched grain, who stand at a crossroads at sunrise or sunset, who have not before experienced [sexual] enjoyment, have just been oiled [as in massage], or are disrespected.

8c–9b.Grahas take hold [of their victim] because of personal indebtedness, the ripening of karma, or previous enmity resulting from their denunciation of deities, brahmans, or great people, but not otherwise.

9cd.One possessed by a nisteja [langorous spirit] is weak, keeps its eyes shut, and talks a lot.

10ab.One possessed by a sura [deity] graha bathes regularly, wears a cloth with a sweet-scented garland, is gentle, and is excited.

10c–11b.One possessed by an asura [titan] graha is defiled, fearless, arrogant, divisive toward dharma, deities, and twice-born, has many desires, laughs at everyone, and has trembling limbs.

11c–12b.One whose illness is caused by a nāga [serpent] graha licks the corners of his mouth out of a longing for sugar [gula], water, milk, etc., slithers on the ground, has red eyes, and enjoys embrace [kroḍī].

12c–13b.One afflicted by a yakṣa longs for the scent of red garlands, etc., suffers from redness in the eyes, is free of anger, moves quickly, and is deep [in character].

13cd.One afflicted by a gandharva is playful and fond of garlands, fragrances, song, and music.

14ab.One possessed by a rākṣasa is shameless, is fond of liquor, meat, and blood, and is physically impure.

14cd.One possessed by a pitṛ [ancestor] graha performs ancestral ritual offerings of rice and sesame balls, along with water, and is fond of meat.

15ab.One possessed by a heḍhraga graha stands on his knees, keeps his head down, smiles, and holds his hands in a fist.153

15c–16b.One afflicted by a bhasma [ash] graha is unpolished, speaks haltingly, has cold limbs, holds the eyes askance, has well-formed limbs, has a big appetite, and is [otherwise] pure.

16c–17b.One possessed by a yonija [womb-born] graha has sweaty limbs and the scent of sheep, is unrestrained [viz., has criminal tendencies], has unsteady vision, has many desires, acts deliberately, and knowingly has a taste for flesh [māṃsārthī].

17c–18b.One possessed by a kasmala [dirty, weak] graha has no physical purity, is covered with stains and mud, sleeps on ashes laughing and wailing, hates women, and always terrifies others while eating.

18c–19b.One afflicted by a graha known as pralāpa [incoherent, chattering] dances and laughs, has desiccated limbs that are prone to injury, has many desires, and talks a lot aimlessly.

19cd.One possessed by a vaināyaka [obstructer] graha hisses,154 vomits, and grinds his teeth.

20.One who is possessed by a kuśa-graha [probably one that resides on kuśa grass], lives in solitude, has pale limbs, washes regularly, makes harsh noises, is nourished on unheated food, and does not speak.

21.One possessed by an antyaja [outcaste, tribal] graha is smeared with excrement and mud, has red, bloodshot eyes, is threatening, has many desires, speaks disconsolately, is greedy, and has shaky limbs.

22ab.One possessed by a piśāca [flesh-eating demon] smells bad, is physically impure, is restless, and speaks exceedingly harshly.

22c–23b.One afflicted by a bhūta-graha can imitate anyone, gets into fights, shouts at people, and becomes transformed in order to climb trees.

23c–24b.One seriously afflicted by vāta-based insanity [vātonmādī] experiences [uncontrolled] quivering, laughing, singing, wailing, throwing about of one’s limbs, and possesses a lean, copper-colored body.

24c–25b.Those suffering from pitta or kapha-based insanity bellow loudly, move quickly, express anger, cast a cold shadow, are insatiable about food, have hot yellow bodies, and tend to spit.

25c–f.The symptoms of apasmāra [convulsions] are open eyes, falling down, senselessness or unconsciousness, foaming at the mouth, vomiting, contraction of the feet and hands, moaning piteously, exhibiting a frightening demeanor, gnashing of the teeth, [behaving as if] intoxicated, and [the appearance of] bliss.

26.A brahmarākṣasa is a graha that constantly offers sacrifice to gods and brahmans [viprān], reciting the Vedas and placing kusa grass [on an altar] while performing rituals of the twice-born.

27.One possessed by a kṣatriya-graha moves quickly, leaps about, laughs, and exercises power.

28ab.One possessed by a vanij [vaisya] graha is expansive, laughs, moans a lot, rubs himself, and shouts.

28c–29b.One possessed by a vṛṣala (śūdra or outcaste) graha speaks out what should not be spoken, dances, is easily provoked, dines on feces and urine, touches his penis, etc., and despises brahmans.



This section from the ĪŚP deserves much more comment than can be accommodated here. Nevertheless, I must offer a few words. First, it provides more detail on the vulnerability of women to spirit possession than is found in the earlier canonical āyurvedic texts. It is not that this supposition of increased vulnerability necessarily intensified over the centuries; it may simply be that the ĪŚP was more prolix in negotiating its various dimensions. In fact, as we have seen in the BĀU, references to women’s possession, hence their vulnerability, may be dated to the mid-first millennium B.C.E. or earlier. The somewhat later discussions of bālagrahas in the MBh and the early medical literature also reveal that women were viewed by the later centuries B.C.E. as highly susceptible to possession. The standard attributed causes of this were their monthly release of blood, regarded as attractive to spirits, and their childbearing capacity, in which protective measures to guard newborns against threats both visible and invisible were extreme. The latter was doubtless due to comparatively high infant and childhood mortality rates. Regardless, the disadvantaged condition of women worsened, or at least hardened, over the course of the first millennium C.E. to the point that they were equated with sūdras in much of the Dharmasāstra literature of the day. Thus, it is nearly irresistible to argue that in a patriarchal society that was increasingly oppressive toward women, their stigmatization was more pronounced in the early second millennium, the date of the ĪŚP, than it was earlier. This would encourage us to project back by at least a millennium the arguments of Lewis and others regarding the correlation of oppression of women and spirit possession, which, as discussed earlier, have a good measure of validity in modern-day India.155

Second, although the presence of varṇa-based grahas is much more evident in the ĪŚP than in the medical texts (note the brahmarākṣasa, kṣatriya-graha, vanig-graha, vṛṣala-graha, antyaja-graha), the influence of the AH and Susruta is nevertheless clear. Third, the variation in clearly defined psychophysical disability is more pronounced. Thus, the heḍhra(ga)-graha, bhasma-graha, and yonija-graha, not mentioned in the earlier medical texts, look less like personality variants than different forms of congenital or neurological disease, or mental retardation.

## The Madanamahāṛṇava
The Madanamahārṇava (MM), written by Viśveśvara Bhaṭṭa in the fourteenth century,156 is one of the two most important works of a little-studied genre that falls between Āyurveda and dharmasāstra known as karmavipāka (the fruition of karma). 157 This literature correlates diseases with actions (karman). Sometimes these are actions said to have been performed in previous births, but by no means is this always the case. The remedies for these conditions consist of ritual expiation (prāyascitta) rather than medicinal preparations, leading, the texts say, to full recovery (niṣkṛti).158 The fortieth and last chapter (taraṇga) of the MM describes symptoms of possession by thirty-one different grahas, all the result of ill-begotten past karma, most—if not all—of it accumulated in the present birth. In addition to describing symptoms, the text speculates on their causes and prescribes ritual remedies.

The names of many of these grahas are unusual. They are unlike the names of grahas in the other texts and ethnographies examined here, which are largely the toponyms of general categories such as rākṣasa or piśāca, ruthless feminine grāhīs such as Vinatā or Mukhamaṇḍikā, or the frightening bhūtas of Varanasi (see below). The names of the possessors here often do not have obvious connections to the disease or affliction described. Rather, they suggest a brahmanical normativizing, as their names, hence identities, appear to have been sanitized, blunting some of the impact of the afflictions described. Furthermore, the classifications betray a pedantry that foregrounds orthodox morality.159 This has the effect of conferring on the ritual treatments a sense of formulaic brahmanical efficacy. Because of this framework, the only one I know of that consciously applies principles of sastra to possession, the possibility of endogenous pathology is never considered as a cause of the affliction being discussed. The unyielding agenda, then, is to suggest that questionable moral judgment, contiguous with the appearance of suspect symptomatology, plays a crucial role in weakening the individual, encouraging the hostile takeover of the individual by an untoward spirit.

As we have seen repeatedly from the vedic period to the present, in India no less than elsewhere, adherence to normative social and moral codes programmatically sustains cultural foundations, providing areas of comfort and control for cultural elites and ruling classes. In India, perhaps more than elsewhere, however, socioreligious law (dharma) has been self-regulating, requiring marginally less external control. Nevertheless, it has not always been a procrustean bed on which people bind themselves, as often depicted by scholars and cultural advocates alike. There have always been mechanisms of escape, and these have either been recognized by socioreligious codes or these codes have turned a blind eye to them, knowing that they are necessary for the maintenance of cultural harmony. Not everyone fits into the system. So, rather than forcibly displacing or suppressing those who are ill-fitting, the system has served up and sanctioned these escape routes. Specifically, transgressiveness in India has found culturally acceptable norms and mechanisms in the forms of wandering mendicancy and forest dwelling through religiously inspired renunciation, transgressive modes of sexuality or ritualizing through tantric practice, or, appositely, locating niches for abnormal or resistant personalities through an edifice of multiple or dissociative personality–inspired bhūtavidyā. Oracular possession, as we have seen, takes advantage of these well-articulated loopholes in a positive religiously acceptable manner. However, negative possession does not and cannot always locate or negotiate these loopholes. It is, therefore, dealt with by texts that address abnormal bahavior. These include not just āyurvedic texts but more programmatic texts on the margins of Āyurveda, including the MM. The usual result in the event of such abnormality is an unwitting victim in need of exorcism and healing. We see this in a range of texts and examples, from the paradigmatic possession of Nala by Kali, a child possessed by a bālagraha because of a lapse by the mother or another relative, or an enemy hiring a tantric to curse an individual with an evil spirit, a belief that Dwyer has shown holds sway over large numbers of victims of possession at Bālājī. In all these cases, even if unintended, there is the construal of dharmic or moral lapse. This, then, backgrounds the “ripening of karma” that requires ritual treatment.

The fortieth taraṇga of the MM consists largely of a prose commentary on material from two earlier karmavipaka works, now lost, the Karmavipākasaṇgraha and the Karmavipākasamuccaya. The taraṇga begins, typically, with general rules (paribhāṣā) for ritual exorcism or expiation, include fasting, chanting (japa) brief mantras and names of deities, reciting simple vedic hymns or verses including the Puruṣa-sūkta (ṚV 10.90) and the gāyatrī mantra (ṚV 3.62.10), though non-vedic mantras are also prescribed. The MMprescribes a general expiatory mantra, unattributed to any other text, in which the name of the graha is replaceable: pragṛhīṣva baliṃ cemaṃ dāharūpa mahājvara | āturasya sukhaṃ siddhiṃ prayaccha tvaṃ mahāgraha || (O, Great Fever [graha] in the Form of Fire, possess this offering [bali]; bestow, O Great Graha, comfort and fulfillment on this afflicted person). The second line remains unchanged throughout, while the names of the different grahas are substituted in the second half of the first line, for example, pragṛhīṣya balim cemaṃ aikāhika mahājvara, pragṛhīṣva baliṃ cemaṃ karṇākhya tvaṃ mahāgraha.

The principle of transfer, found throughout Indian religious texts and analyzed in Chapter 5 as “transfer of essence,” is also seen here. The graha is neither killed nor dissolved nor destroyed, but is transferred into the offering material used in a small localized sacrificial offering called bali.160 This recommended bali consists of offerings of fragrant red flowers, oil, incense, and various other material, placed in a new brass pot (kāṃsyapātra, bell-metal), which is then left in a temple (devalaye) or at a crossroad (catuṣpathe). In addition, homa is often prescribed with offerings of cooked rice (caru), black sesame seeds, and parched grain (laja). On some occasions, well-known homas, such as the kūṣmāṇḍa,161 are recommended, as is the gifting of gold and other valuable objects to brahmans. These rules are set in the context of exorcistic expiatory ritual for the first graha on the list, the prajagraha (offspring seizer). This graha possesses a man who eats leftover food or has sex with his wife while she is having her menstrual period. It is noteworthy that many of the grahas on the list in the MM possess their victim for this offense. The victim then develops a fever, diarrhea (atisara), skin disease (kuṣṭha), and palsied limbs. It is not clear why this graha is called prajagraha.

The fortieth tataṇga, of the MM is too long to present full details of all of the karmavipāka grahas mentioned there. It must suffice to list them, noting their meanings and the offenses that lead to their possession, and to discuss only a few of them in order to better explicate the intellectual processes deployed by the dharmaśāstra establishment to link possession by these grahas with moral lapses and brahmanical ritual exorcism.


1. prajāgraha (offspring grasper) possesses one who has sex with a woman while she is having her menstrual period or eats leftover food.
2. jvaragraha (fever demon) possesses a man who has sex with a cāṇḍālī or a woman while she is having her menstrual period.
3. aikāhikādi jvaragraha (ephemeral fever grasper) possesses a thief, is vain, is unkind or injurious to animals, and behaves improperly.
4. pratuṇḍagraha (snouted grasper) possesses a person who, in a state of ritual impurity, touches a brahman, the image of a deity, or one who is well-educated or wise (buddhipūrvakam).
5. kāmilagraha (lustful grasper) possesses one who eats in the afternoon from dirty vessels, without having washed his feet.
6. kālanāyakagraha (or lokanāyaka-) (time-lord grasper) possesses one who does not properly perform sacrifice to the planetary deities when the sun and other planets are in the eighth or other (inauspicious) houses of the horoscope.
7. pitṛgraha (ancestral grasper) possesses one whose anger while conducting ordinary affairs in the world causes pain or sorrow for another.
8. lokāyatagraha (materialist grasper) possesses a person who urinates or defecates on an auspicious tree in a temple compound.
9. āpastambagraha (Apastamba grasper) possesses a certain kind of arrogant person (see below).
10. vṛtragraha (snake grasper) possesses a man who has slept with another man’s wife (paradārābhimarsinam).
11. mahājvaragraha (great-fever grasper) possesses a man who has sex with a woman while she is having her menstrual period.
12. kumbhakagraha (pot-bellied grasper) possesses a man who has sex with an outcaste (antyaja) or with another man’s wife.
13. kapilagraha (red grasper) possesses one who spits on a sacred fire or pours (polluting material) on it.
14. sivapādagraha (Śiva’s-foot grasper) possesses one who denounces or acts arrogantly toward his mother, father, deity, or guru.
15. ūrdhvakesigraha (grasper whose hair stands on end) possesses a person who is disgusting, takes other people’s possessions, causes suffering, and spreads rumors (karṇejapam).
16. viṣṭambhagraha (fixing spirit) possesses people, including brahmans, who are totally confused in their judgment.
17. mahājihvagraha (great-tongued grasper) possesses a peson who steps on a mortar and pestle or sacrificial implements.
18. navagraha (new grasper) possesses a man who has sex with the wife of a friend, an ascetic, a guru, or a master.
19. vāsavagraha (Vasu demon) possesses one who kills or beats a snake.
20. vāyasagraha (crow grasper) possesses one who defecates under trees or in gardens of temples or brahmans.
21. kṣetrapālagraha (land protector spirit) afflicts one who disparages gods (devatānindana-), brahmans, cows, etc.
22. acalagraha (immovable grasper) afflicts one who acts friendly with a helper or family member, but then refuses to reciprocate and reviles or steals from them.
23. hastipādagraha (elephant-foot grasper) afflicts one who consumes substances meant for a deity or violates material set aside in a vessel meant for a cow, the sacred fire, or a brahman.
24. karṇagraha (ear spirit) possesses one who consumes temple property.
25. dhanagraha (wealth grasper) possesses a man who has sex with the pregnant wife of an ascetic, a friend, or an employer.
26. avatolagraha (weighted-down grasper) possesses a person who faults a relative, sells prohibited substances, and is heavy-handed with an assistant.
27. kṛśagraha (emaciated grasper) (also called śaśigraha [moon grasper]) possesses one who eats during an eclipse of the sun or moon.
28. skandagraha (Skanda grasper) possesses a person who, attendant on a sacred fire, eats other people’s leftovers after bringing a child already possessed by a childsnatcher (bālagrahayutam).
29. skandāpasmaragraha (Skanda’s forgetfulness or convulsion) possesses one who urinates or defecates into fire.
30. śiśugraha (infant grasper) possesses (saṇkramate, “steps into”) a person who show disrespect toward gods, brahmans, gurus, nobility, cows, or holy places.
31. meṣagraha (sheep grasper) possesses a man who throws sacred ash on a child possessed by a bālagraha.

Now, we elaborate on a few of these categories. The victim of a pratuṇḍagraha suffers from fever, fainting, exhaustion, and paralysis on one side. He liberates himself from this graha by performing the cāndrāyaṇa kṛcchra,162 a type of purificatory fast, reciting (japet) a certain mantra a thousand times (in addition to the standard verse mantra described above), and giving away (presumably to brahmans) as much gold as he can afford.

The victim of a kālanāyakagraha suffers from sudden dryness in the mouth and his sounds become harsh. To alleviate this condition and exorcise this graha, one should offer a mixture of three sweet substances—sugar, ghee, and honey—along with mango sprouts 1,008 times while chanting the jātavedasa mantra (ṚV 1.99). He should also offer as bali scented red flowers and other normal material, as well as powdered parched grains, oil cake (piṇyāka), black sesame seeds, and as much gold as he can afford, in a brass pot at a crossroad. While offering this bali he should recite the appropriate variant on the usual mantra: pragṛhiṣva baliṃ cemaṃ lokanātha mahāgraha | āturasya sukhaṃ siddhiṃ prayaccha tvaṃ mahāgraha || (O, Lord of the World, Great Graha, possess this offering [bali]; bestow, O Great Graha, comfort and fulfillment on this afflicted person).

The āpastambagraha is explained as a spirit (graha) that possesses an unworthy person who sits in a row of brahmans and, because of excessive pride, takes for himself the best plate and consumes special food. This graha is capable of afflicting the transgressor with heart and stomach problems, as well as with consumption. The afflicted person can turn back this possession by performing the cāndrāyaṇa fast and making an offering (balidāna) at a crossroad with the accompaniment of mantras. This, however, does not explain why the graha is called āpastamba. To the best of my knowledge, this is the only occurrence of the word āpastamba that does not refer to the ritual school of that name belonging to the Taittirīya śākhā of the Kṛṣṇayajurveda.163 It is not out of the question, however, that pejoratively it does refer to that ritual school, so-called because a brahman of that school once behaved in this way in a community of non-Āpastambins. The Āpastamba school is the dominant vedic sub-sākhā in Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, and many areas of Karnataka and Maharashtra. The ritual school of the reputed author of this text, Viśveśvara Bhaṭṭa, is not given in the colophon or commentary, but in all likelihood he was not an Āpastambin, because he was from North India.164 Thus, he was probably a member of a different school and had a negative experience with a ritualist of the Āpastamba school, who might have accepted gifts in a manner Viśveśvara Bhaṭṭa judged arrogant.

The victim of a vṛtragraha, an affliction that apparently harks back to the archetypal serpent demon Vṛtra (cf. ṚV 1.32), suffers from dryness of the buttocks, a possible reference to a sexually transmitted disease.165 As exorcistic expiation, he must perform the prājāpatya fast, offer a homa of black sesame seeds with the gāyatrī mantra, recite the gāyatrī an additional ten thousand times, and give away as much gold as is possible. These are very ordinary expiations, particularly compared to the often-exotic prescriptions in the Āyurveda texts and the rich variety of practices documented by ethnographies.

The victim of a kumbhakagraha (also called jambhakagraha) suffers from fever, incoherent speech, and symptoms of asthma. The exorcism consists of the cāndrāyaṇa fast plus offerings of cooked rice with ghee (carusarṣipī) into a fire while reciting the Puruṣa-sūkta with the vyāhṛti mantras (the syllables bhur bhuvaḥ svaḥ).166 This and similar passages suggest that offerings into the fire, supplemented by fasting, are in fact āyurvedic remedies. Nearly all possession is classified as vāta disorder in āyurvedic texts, and certainly the uncontrollable body movements and mental disconnectedness that partially characterize possession support this diagnosis. Kapha-producing (and therefore grounding) food such as cooked rice with ghee is often prescribed to combat vāta debilitation. It is not unreasonable to suggest that the exorcisms prescribed here constitute a kind of daiva Ayurveda, which is still practiced in a few places in India. More specifically, these practices could easily fall within the category of daivavyapāsrayacikitsā (spiritual therapy). Although I have not seen this stated in the primary texts, the implicit āyurvedic argument is that fasting combats severe vāta debiltation, while the offerings of rice with ghee, consistent with the ideology of the balidāna given in the beginning of the fortieth taraṇga of the MM, is designed to attract and capture the offending spirit.

The karṇagraha has a long history, some of which we have recounted earlier (see Chapter 11). This graha is not depicted as disease-producing by Varāhamihira or the commentator Bhaṭṭotpala. However, in the MM it is made to conform with the disease-producing norm, stripped of its earlier significance as an oracular spirit. Here, on the authority of Kātyāyana, the MM says that a karṇagraha possesses one who consumes temple property, causing sudden deafness, a freezing of the tongue, and great itching on the limb (= penis?). The antidote is the cāndrāyaṇa fast, homa with the vyāhṛti mantras, and recitation of a hymn from the ṚV (6.24) to Indra 1,008 times. This hymn has little obvious relevance to the exorcism of a karṇagraha, but is prescribed in the srauta ritual as a hymn to be recited in for slaying of the demon Vṛtra.167 The balidāna to be offered to the graha consists of ground black sesame, wine (surā), meat, rice, parched grain, yogurt, and (probably) onion (kanda). This should all be placed at a crossroad along with a banner, scented flowers, and incense, over which a tantric ritualist (mantravit) should recite the relevant mantras.168

Another challenging figure is the avatolagraha. The MM quotes the Karmavipākasaṇgraha as its main authority on this. This graha, according to the MM, possesses a person who is disagreeable and a social problem. The texts do not help us with the word avatola, however. This neologism might indicate deceitfulness, more literally “weighing down” or fixing the scales when weighing and selling any substance (perhaps a prohibited one).169 The physical debilities produced by an avatolagraha include coughing, chest problems, aching limbs, and decreased appetite. The three-step exorcism is a mix of the usual prescriptions: recitations of the Viṣṇu- and Puruṣa-sūktas, performance of the kūṣmāṇḍahoma, offering of a thousand pots for bathing an image of a deity (sahasrakalaśasnānam), and recitation (japet) of a mantra (ṚV 4.31.1) 1,008 times. Like most of the expiations, this one assumes that the victim is a person of means, as these rituals require large expenditures.

Another ethereal enemy of moral lassitude is the śiśagraha. This graha afflicts its victim with fever, diarrhea, eczema (āsyaśośī), and shaking of the hands and feet. The name of this graha is striking because in both the ethnographic record and at modern spirit healing centers such as Bālājī the possessors are often identified by the families of the victim and the ritual authorities alike as children who have died young, their souls (jīva) tortured and unappeased, having not undergone the standard rites of passage (saṃskāra). Thus, an echo of popular possession is probably present here, though it is not stated. Once again, then, we are left with a name with no obvious link to the offense at hand. The victim will achieve peace if he offers as bali a pot filled with parched grain, liquid milk sweet (pāyasa), chicken, lamb, and gold. Along with this, he should hire a priest to offer bali of red cloth on a banyan root (vaṭamūle) with the usual mantra. Very few of these grahas take nonvegetarian food, but for some reason this one does. It is possible that this passage reflects a local practice of offering meat to spirits of deceased babies and children. Thus, in spite of a nearly crushing brahmanical palimpsest, the MM appears to reflect a propinquity of Sanskritic and local practices.

## Bhūtas of Varanasi
An important contemporary source of bhūtavidyā is K. M. Shukla’s ethnographic account from the environs of Varanasi of the exorcism of eleven kinds of piśāca responsible for different illnesses.170 Two features of this account are immediately noteworthy. The first is that these bhūtas are extremely malevolent, more evidently gruesome than those in the lists examined above. The second is that Shukla’s study is deeply contextualized; most of the bhūtas are easily located in the prevailing cultural environment—which raises questions about the cultural environment that surrounded the composition of the earlier lists in the Sanskrit medical and tantric literature. These texts, of course, were not multifaceted anthropological tracts, but specialized texts safely within the disciplinary boundaries established at the time. However, it is this feature of broad-based cultural understanding that separates Shukla’s account from earlier lists of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century “orientalist” scholars (particularly those who also happened to be missionaries), which tend to be thoroughly decontextualized or only randomly contextualized.171

The piśācas are the following: (1) a cuṛail, a bloodsucking witch with feet turned backward, found in bamboo groves, bel trees (Skt. bilva [wood-apple, a tree sacred to Śiva]), or banana trees. Sheldon Pollock refers to this demonic creature as “the succubus of the Indian male’s nightmare world, who threatens him with death through sexual depletion and must therefore be suppressed”;172 (2) a savat or spirit of a deceased first wife, hence the rival of a second, who attacks the latter when she is not properly regarded; (3) a daitya, a nocturnal spirit that dwells in a pipal tree; the word daitya is commonly attested, and not, apparently, a relic of its usage in AH 6.4.16–17 cited above; (4) a brahma, or spirit of a brahman who dies an unnatural or untimely death (akālamṛtyu); (5) a haḍikaś brahma, the spirit of an unwanted newborn that is kept in a basket (haḍi) and buried; (6) a budnua,173 the spirit of one who has drowned and attacks an individual who comes to bathe in that pond, tank, and so on; (7) a jin or jinnad, a Muslim spirit who resides in a palm or pipal tree or in a graveyard near a mosque; (8) a sahid, or Muslim martyr; (9) a bhavānī, an unmarried female who dies an unnatural death, then troubles children and other family members if she is not properly worshipped; (10) a marū,174 the spirit of a person killed because of the wrath of the goddess (also bhavānī, but not identical to the spirit of that designation), who dwells in a house and causes trouble in the family; (11) a ḍīh, a minor spirit who fails to receive promised offerings. The offering of choice to a ḍīh is gāñjā (cannabis), promised to it after a cure is enacted.175

## Possession Among the Divehi
The Divehi are an indigenous people of the Maldive islands, far to the southwest of the subcontinent, but well within the Indo-Islamic cultural orbit. Clarence Maloney, who conducted close and lingustically informed field-work there in the 1970s, states: “Within the [Divehi] village, jinnis cause spontaneous abortion, barrenness, sickness, epidemics, fainting, unexplained noises or any other sudden or unexplained phenomenon.”176 Indeed, the general word there for bhūta is jinni. Maloney records forty-two varieties of Divehi jinni, many derived from Tamil or Simhala words, many others seemingly indigenous Divehi words, but eleven probably derived from Sanskrit. These are (1) devi (< Skt. devi), “a generic name for a personified spirit or godling, now applied to male or female spirits which were pre-Muslim deities”; (2) hanḍi (< Skt. caṇḍa, cruel; cf. Caṇḍī), a “generic name for jinni, especially smaller ones; usually but not always female; one may fly through the air or along the ground; it may make a sound like a tongue click, and has a ‘strong spirit’”; (3) furēta (< Skt. preta), “any large or fearful spirit; male or female; esp. an apparition of light over the ocean at night; bad people might become one; it may walk with a shroud”; (4) ferēta (< Skt. preta), “lights on the sea; like a ship full of lights; it may have an eye on the top of its head, so it has to bend forward to see; may catch people; as lights on the sea, often frightens fishermen”; (5) hāmunḍi (< Skt. Cāmuṇḍa, Cāmuṇḍī), which “may take any form, lives in village; disturbs domestic fowl; may be seen as a hen with chicks about it”; (6) buddevi (< Skt. bhudevi),177 “a devi of a budu (idol)”; (7) dēyō, diyō (< Skt. devī), a “spiritual queen, a devi”; (8) kandā hanḍi (< Skt. Skanda), “a female; troubles men; makes sexual dreams and shows intercourse; it may have children by men, and makes men unconscious”; (9) avaṭeri (< Skt. avatāra),178 “a kind of hanḍi that lives in the jungle; female; she has long hair and old clothes; if people leave out supplies in the kitchen at night she will grind the condiments, scrape the coconut, cut up the fish and fix the fire”; (10) furāna (< Skt. purāṇa), a “ghost of the dead;” and (11) ravo (< Skt. Rāvaṇa), “a devi that causes disease to children; makes them lean and troublesome”;179 Maloney notes that jinnis “do not usually possess people as Hindu patron deities may.”180 By this, he means that there is no evident oracular possession. This indicates that the perceived spirit presences are largely infestations; sources of trouble rather than ecstasy. However, further work must be done on this.

These multiforms of bhūtavidyā demonstrate that it is an enduring feature of the South Asian cultural area, both in time and space, from the vedic period to the present, from the Silk Road and Tibet to the Maldives. These extravagant, even baroque, demonologies nearly always suggest possession, as affliction, harassment, and influence by a bhūta or graha indicate this likelihood in the South Asian psychophysical and cultural systems. The vedic demonologies, like those of modern Varanasi or the Maldives, are integral aspects of folk traditions. The former, however, were captured and canonized by early Sanskritic culture and, therefore, left deep and long-lasting influences on the images and typologies of bhūtavidyā in all strata and nearly all regions of South Asia.

The more systematized demonologies, in the sense of being directly associated with an extended literary tradition, such as are found in BĀU 3.2 and the āyurvedic texts, are consequently concerned primarily with formal epistemologies. In the āyurvedic texts these are more reminiscent of human personality, at least of powerful elements of its relatively normative dark side, than of uncontrolled, irrepressible, and dangerous elements of an invisible nonhuman wilderness, in spite of the exotic labeling in these texts. In other words, the Sanskritic demonologies appear to participate more in the domestic than the wild. In a cultural sense, then, they bespeak the domestication of possession. It is as if relegating them to the realm of literature both sanitizes and scientizes them, which is why they appear both better defined and less dangerous than, for example, the bhūtas of Varanasi. The grahas in the bhūtavidyā lists in the āyurvedic texts may also be compared to the child-snatchers, who were systematized in the MBh and in other sections of the āyurvedic texts. The latter were clearly regarded as horrific and relentlessly dangerous and were, in this sense, closer to the demons of present-day Varanasi. In practice, however, medical practitioners did not rely strictly on the designations from the āyurvedic texts. There always has been, I believe, a spillover from popular culture to text, which may be seen in the increasing numbers of possessing beings from Caraka to Vāgbhaṭa, as well as a spillover from āyurvedic texts into popular culture. The latter may be seen in the list of childsnatchers in the MBh and tantric texts, as well as in some of the more recognizable bhūtas of Varanasi and the Maldive islands.
