+++
title = "06 Childsnatchers and Therapy to Counter Demonic Possession"

+++
(Piśacagṛhītabhaiṣajyam)191

A section from the MBh (3.216–219) on the birth of Skanda and the origin of bālagrahas or childsnatchers was explored in Chapter 6. That passage contains much of the essential information found in the āyurvedic texts, including specialized works on pediatrics, descriptive lists of bālagrahas, diseases attributed to them, and remedies. Perhaps the most comprehensive of these passages appears in the Kāsyapa Saṃhitā (KS) of the seventh century, a text that now survives in only two fragmentary manuscripts, testifying to the fact that it was soon eclipsed by other texts, particularly the AH, despite sections like this one that are more comprehensive than the corresponding sections of the later texts. The passage in question is intact and has been translated well by Dominik Wujastyk.192 For this reason it is not necessary to enter into a full translation of it or corresponding texts.193 The important point is that the fundamental interpretation of the action of grahas, including bālagrahas, at least in the classical āyurvedic texts (we have seen that the perspective in the Tibetan medical texts can be different), is that they are agents of possession. Other symbolic interpretations of the meaning of grahas and verbs used to describe their actions (such as abhigharṣayati [attack]) may be valid as well,194 but they cannot override the centrality of possession or of moral missteps (even if inadvertent) or weaknesses that are consistently seen to lie at the basis of disease-causing possession. The KS describes many conditions, moral lapses all, ideologically consistent with what is found elsewhere, in which the archetypal childsnatcher, Jātahāriṇī, invades a pregnant woman and terminates her pregnancy. As expected, “only dharma can turn her away,” says the KS.195

Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati 41

Rather than discussing the canonical āyurvedic texts, it will better serve our interests to examine paṭala 41 of the Isānasivagurudevapaddhati. With respect to the relationship between the ĪŚP and the āyurvedic texts (as well as with the MBh), it is notable that the former is consistent with the latter in rendering semidivine grahas called “mothers” (mātṛ) as bālagrahas that afflict children below the age of sixteen, especially fetuses, while, as we saw above, the ĪŚP is also consistent with the āyurvedic texts in regarding yakṣas, gandharvas, rākṣasas, and so on, as possessors that bequeath insanity to adults.196

The author of the ĪŚP proposes that, out of the many traditions of treatment of balagrahas, he discusses two of them in brief: the procedures described in the Khaḍgarāvaṇa and in the Nārāyaṇīya.197 The procedure described in the Khaḍgarāvaṇa enumerates several general procedures, then prescribes modifications depending on the age of the child and the identity of the mātṛkā (Little Mother), the offending spirit. The ritualist should take earth from both banks of a river and construct an effigy (puttalīm) from it in the shape of a child. This will then substitute for the child in the ritual, though it appears that the child should also be present. Then the ritualist should make a packet of cooked white rice along with fresh rice grains, fish, meat, and liquor, together with flowers, yogurt, milk, and black sesame seeds. The wrapper should probably be a strong leaf (this is not mentioned, but is usually the case) and should, according to the text, be tied tightly with yellow thread. The intent seems to be to combine pure and impure offerings, presumably for Gaṇeśa and Vīrabhadra and the ill-intentioned spirits. After the ground for the ritual is cleaned, it should be embellished with thirteen svastikas, eight ghee lamps, and different kinds of fruit, including bananas. One should then make a large vessel, in the middle of which one should place the effigy, then set lamps and other ritual items around it.

Then, at the time of the midday sandhyā, Gaṇeśa should be worshipped with incense and other appropriate offerings. Brāhmī and the other mātṛkās should be installed as the deities of the primary directions around it, and Vārāhī and other goddesses, including Caṇḍikā, should be installed and worshipped in the directional corners. After the tantric ritualist invokes and worships Vīrabhadra and Gaṇeśa at the center, the substances for sacrifice (bali) should be divided in half, with four parts each for Vīrabhadra and Gaṇeśa, and four parts for the goddesses, placed on pipal leaves. The prescribed mantra should be recited for each deity separately, and peaceful (sāttvika) offerings should be given to both Khaḍgarāvaṇa and whichever goddess is to be named, in this case Nandā as the possessor of children in their first year. The mantra is: o namo bhagavate khaḍgarāvaṇāya dīrghadarśanāya hana gṛhṇa muñca bālakaṃṭhaṭha (O, salutations to the illustrious Lord Khaḍgarāvaṇa whose vision is far-reaching. Kill! Possess! Liberate the child! Svāhā.).198 Variants of this mantra are given for each of the offending mātṛkās. After these offerings are made and the child is exposed to them, one may take the child away.

The text then prescribes certain fumigants or demonifuges to be used as direct therapy on the victim. The substances that comprise these fumigants should be collected and burned in the presence of the victim in order to create an environment unpleasant to the spirit, hence encouraging its departure.199 Fumigation therapy is still practiced in India, including in Kerala, Varanasi, Rajasthan, and Pune.200 I was informed by a well-known vaidya in Kerala who still manufactures and prescribes such fumigants that they should not be burned for more than fifteen minutes three times a day.201 It is doubtful that the recipes used for fumigants today anywhere in India are identical to those listed in the AH, Caraka, Susruta, or other classical āyurvedic texts, or even in classical Tantras, such as the ĪŚP. In Kerala, the ingredients and processes employed in their manufacture are secrets closely held by the families of aṣṭavaidya Nambudiris who have been handed down these ancient medical traditions.202 These physicians have studied the appropriate sections of the AH (but probably not Caraka and Susruta) and have a rough familiarity with the ĪŚP, though it is no longer formally studied or used as a ritual handbook in any of the surviving Kerala āyurvedic traditions.

The fumigation rite for an infant prescribes igniting neem leaves and ghee mixed with mustard seeds left over from offerings made to Śiva.203 This smoldering concoction should be carried around the infant clockwise, probably in an earthen bowl (though this is not mentioned). Neem leaves have long been regarded as a natural antiseptic,204 and, along with mustard seeds, they give off an intense smoke when burned. The ghee is prescribed because it helps ignite fire and encourages smoke to become dense when the flames die down. This combination of substances is apparently inhospitable to bhūtas, as it surely is to humans. At the same time, the ritualist should place sprouts germinated from nyagrodha, udumbara, aśvattha, bilva, and pālāsa seeds in a pot, rinse or sprinkle them with water for three days, and wash them thoroughly on the fourth day. The reason for this is not stated, but these are all “auspicious” plants, recommended for use in sacrifice (medhya) or as offerings to deities, and are regarded as conducive to the growth and renewal of the child.205 We may assume from this that the ritual should be repeated for three or four days.

The procedures and substances are identical if the affliction, this time by Sunandā, occurs in the child’s second year. The instructions for the third year’s exorcism state that ajaśṛṇga (this should probably read ajaśṛṇgī) should be added to the fumigant. This is a malodorous shrub whose fruit is said to be sharp as a horn, recommended as early as the AV (AVŚ 4.37; AVP 13.4) as a remedy for sore eyes as well as for destroying evil beings.206 For the fifth- to twelfth-year ritual, neem leaves should be burned (dhūpayet) mixed with ghee and guggulu, an aromatic resin prescribed to strengthen bones and connective tissue but also commonly used in homa because it ignites easily and burns continuously. In all cases, after the fourth day the ritualist should take a purificatory bath. According to the Khaḍgarāvaṇa, grahas can take hold of children up to the twelfth year. Īśānaśivagurudeva adds, however, that it can occur up to the sixteenth year, though others say bālagrahas can attack up to age seventeen. The text does not state what one should do with the puttalī after the exorcism is concluded, but, following traditional practice, it is likely that it was to be discarded in a river, temple tank, or other body of water considered sacred (tīrtha).

The ĪŚP does not give the rationale for the puttalī, though it is consistent with both earlier textuality of healing and current practice to infer that the disease, as well as the grāhī, will leave the patient or victim and enter the puttalī. The Kauśikasūtra, for example, prescribes a treatment for hepatitis in which a yellow bird should be placed in a bowl on the floor beneath the head of a person lying on a bed with his head extended over the end of the bed. While a certain hymn from the AVŚ (1.22) is being recited along with other mantras specific to the Kauśikasūtra, water should be poured over the person’s head so that it flows onto the bird.207 The disease then exits the patient and enters the bird. The notion that diseases might disappear but exogenous disease-causing agents continue to circulate is also attested at Bālājī, where possessing spirits may be temporarily transferred to a ritualist or clinician, as described earlier, and eventually be retrained as good spirits in the phauj or army of Hanumān. In that case, they permanently leave the body (and mind) of the client, whose psychosocial dysfunction gradually disappears as the grip (grahaṇa) of the bhūt-pret attenuates.

## The (Viṣa-) Nārāyaṇīya

The (Viṣa-) Nārāyaṇīya, so-called because its first ten chapters deal with poisons (viṣa, primarily from snakes) and their treatment,208 mentions grāhīs not only for specific years of the child’s life but for the first ten days of life and the first twelve months as well. It does not mention a puttalī, but does prescribe the construction of yantras, the placement of divinities within them, and the offerings and primary mantras to be employed for them, some of the latter being quite long and complicated. After noting the name of the grāhī, Pāpinī, which might afflict a child on the day it is born, the text states that a square sacrificial altar (balipīṭham) should be consecrated. This should be performed in the home, though the alternative is given of a crossroad (catvari), a ritually potent locale that is prescribed as a site for balidana in the Madanamahāṛṇava. Vīrabhadra should be installed in the center and the goddesses (mātṛḥ) in the corners and primary directions. Gaṇeśa (vināyakam) and Cāmuṇḍī should be installed in the northeast and worshipped with grain cakes, fish, meat, cooked rice, sesame, powdered spices, and other similar items, including liquor, representing, as in the case of substances prescribed by the Khaḍgarāvaṇa, the spectrum from pure to impure, cooling to heating, right-handed to left-handed.

As before, fumigants or demonifuges should be burned, but here the ingredients may consist of more exotic substances. A simple demonifuge is prescribed for the first day: neem leaves dipped in ghee, then mixed with shoots from the uśīra, (apa)marga, and pipal trees. More difficult is the one prescribed for the second day. After rubbing an ointment of sandalwood, uśīra leaf, mayura leaf, and goat’s urine on the baby, a demonifuge of cow’s teeth, horn, and hair should be burned. More difficult still is the one prescribed for the eighth day. After an ointment of goat’s urine mixed with vacā, a “hot” root often recommended for bestowing mental clarity or sharpness, and kuṣṭha, a very bitter plant, is applied to the baby, a demonifuge of tiger’s nails is burned. On the tenth day, monkey’s hair and nails are burned, and the ritual for the second month consists of, among other things, the burning of a fumigant of neem leaves and garlic. The procedures are often lengthy, thus I cannot enter into a full-scale treatment of them. It must suffice to provide the names of the goddesses and discuss some of the mantras.

The goddess for the first day is Pāpanī (Transgressive Lady), for the second day Bhāṣiṇī (Lady of Speech), for the third Jhaṇṭālī (Misty Lady[?]), for the fourth Kākolī (Raven Lady), for the fifth Siṃhikā (Lion Lady),209 for the sixth Phaṭkārī (Lady Who Exclaims phaṭ!),210 for the seventh Mukakeśī (Lady Whose Hair Smells Like Cowdung), for the eighth Daṇḍinī (Lady Who Holds the Staff), for the ninth Mahāmahiṣī (Great Buffalo Lady), and for the tenth Rodanī (Tearful Lady). The grāhī goddess for the first month of the first year is Putanā (Stinking Lady), for the second month Makuṭā (Crested Lady), for the third Gomukhī (Cow-Mouthed Lady), for the fourth Piṇgalā (Tawny Lady), for the fifth Haṃsikā (Goosey Lady), for the sixth Paṇkajā (Lotus Lady), for the seventh Śītalā (Cool Lady), for the eighth Yamunā (Goddess of the Yamunā River), for the ninth Kumbhakarṇī (Pot-Eared Lady), for the tenth Tāpasī (Lady of Austerities), for the eleventh Rākṣasī (Demoness), and for the twelfth Capalā (Trembling Lady). The second year the grāhī is Yātanā (Vengeful Lady), the third year Rodinī (Weeping Lady), the fourth Caṭakā (Sparrow Lady), the fifth Cañcalā (Fickle Lady), the sixth Dhāvanī (Loping Lady), the seventh Yamunā, the eighth Hāyanī (Relinquising Lady), the ninth Kālinī (Lady of Time), the tenth Kalahaṃsī (Supreme Goose Lady), the eleventh Devadūtī (Lady Emissary of the Gods), the twelfth Palitā (Crone), the thirteenth Vāyavī (Lady of the Wind), the fourteenth Yakṣiṇī, the fifteenth Muñjakamuñcī (Wicked Lady of the Bullrushes [?]), the sixteenth Vānarī (Monkey Lady), the seventeenth Bandhavatī (Lady Who Binds), and the eighteenth Kumārī (Princess).

For all of these, sesame is offered into a fire with the mantra o muñca paca daha āgaccha bālike ṭhaṭha (Om, Liberate! Cook! Burn! Come! Young lady, svāhā). After these bali offerings are made, japa (simple repetition of a mantra) is performed while the ritual officiant touches the child. The japa mantras are long, for example, namaḥ sarvamātṝṇāṃ hṛdayamoṭaka mañja kaḍhḍha sphoṭaya sphura gṛhṇa ākarṣaya troṭaya evaṃ jñāpayati hara nirdoṣaṃ kuru bālakaṃ ṭhaṭha (Salutations, O remedy in the form of a heart-pill for all the Little Mothers, cleanse! kaḍhḍha[?]! Flash! Spring forth! Possess! Attract! Break apart! Thus one should announce. O Hara, make this child faultless, svāha).211 Other, longer mantras follow, which are said to lead to the liberation of the spirit (grahamukti). A number of protective verse mantras should then be recited. These resemble versified nyasas, invoking an abundance of male divinities to protect the directions and the parts of the body. In these texts, male deities are protective and liberating, especially Gaṇeśa and Vīrabhadra, while goddesses either play a subservient role or are themselves the possessing grāhīs.
 