+++
title = "07 Healing and the Circulation of Knowledge"

+++
As important as it is to examine the categories and taxonomies of bhūtavidyā, it is equally important to examine the healing process. This involves investigating the broader dynamics of exorcism: ritual, pharmacopia, healers, and the interaction between healer and client. Some of this has been addressed above, in anthropological and other ethnographic discussions of the healing process.212 We shall here look more closely at selected passages from the vast āyurvedic and tantric material, mostly the former.

It is impossible to address the exorcistic material in all the relevant texts. With the limitation of employing selected passages it is best to approach them chronologically, because this is the best way to convey an idea of how the practices and, indeed, the vidyā of bhūtavidyā evolved. This also helps illuminate key aspects of the morphology of the cultural, linguistic, and moral underpinnings of mental illness, especially of exogenously produced unmāda. A much longer study could be undertaken on this if more material is used. But the following should provide a few guidelines for such a study.

In discussion of these treatments, I must first summarize some of the exorcistic procedures found in Caraka, Suśruta, and Vāgbhaṭa, including the diagnostics, pharmacopeia and other “rational” modalities (yuktivyapāśrayacikitsā),213 as well as ritual and moral treatments (daivavyapāsrayacikitsā). Then I discuss in some detail the procedures found in the Cakradatta, an important āyurvedic text of the eleventh century that brings together āyurvedic and tantric therapies. It would be a mistake to assert that exorcisms are of a single style of practice or generated by indigenous scholars equally informed about the intricacies of medicine and ritual, especially after the turn of the first millennium C.E. Like all ritual in India, this was diversified even within specific performative traditions.214 The ethnography that concludes this chapter is drawn from fieldwork I conducted in Kerala and demonstrates how medical, tantric, and astrological traditions operate in tandem, in a seamlessly functioning and fairly ancient system of referral, how they strengthen rather than isolate one another.

## Treatment in the Early Āyurvedic Compendia

The earliest compendia, Caraka and Susruta, of the early centuries of the Common Era, as well as those of the next chronological level four or five centuries later, Kāśyapa and Vāgbhaṭa’s AH and ASaṃ, do not mirror each other as closely as might be expected in their treatment of unmāda. Considerable differences may be found among the texts, including differences in opinion that go beyond the enumeration and designation of grahas. The most glaring instance of this is Caraka’s overall treatment of unmāda, which is less nuanced and more straightforward than Susruta’s. One aspect of this is Caraka’s more substantial treatment of the psychopharmacology.

Susruta defines the terms graha and bhūta more specifically than Caraka, but he adds details that were probably borrowings from other genres (e.g., the Sanskrit epics), namely, that grahas are powerful beings who achieved their present form through severe austerities, religious donations, performative and moral vows, and observation of appropriate socioreligious duties. These enabled them to achieve the “eight powers” according to their respective strength.215 However, adds Susruta, they do not themselves possess humans; it is their minions who do their bidding, who do the dirty work of possession, and, in a statement presumably directed at Caraka and others, Susruta states that “those who say that they possess are to be removed from the orbit of bhūtavidyā due to their ignorance.”216 This agrees with the general tenor of what may be found in the Mahābhārata, Rāmayana, and other major texts of the time, which mention myriad demons under the control of a few, an ideology of bhūtas that we still find today at Bālājī in Rajasthan, Chottanikkara in Kerala, and generally throughout India (as well as in many areas of Christendom, where the “evil one” is said to have innumerable agents).

After distinguishing the different bhūtas, Caraka (CaCi 6.9.23) declares that, if unmāda is caused by possession by spirits that demand sex or worship, the physician (bhiṣak) should determine the nature of the possession through the intent and behavior of the client and then prescribe suitable medicinal treatment and mantras, as well as sacrificial offerings and gifts of food.217 Caraka subsequently recommends a variety of therapies common to both exogenous (āgantukā) and endogenous (nija) unmāda—intended to cleanse the victim internally and restore his or her balance of doṣas. The therapies include laxatives, dietary modification, emetics, medicated oil applied to the head (sirovirecana), full-body oil massage, inhalation (of smoke from a dhūmavarti, a medicated cigar) and fumigation therapies, bloodletting, and, especially for exogenous unmāda, consumption of ghee. These therapies “enliven the mind, intellect, memory, and consciousness” (manobuddhismṛtisaṃjñāprabodhanam; CaCi 6.9.32cd).

Incurable insanity is also recognized, in which case treatment is not recommended. However, extreme insanity that is deemed curable may be treated with extreme therapies, including forms of shock therapy including beatings (tāḍanam), which might be useful in “stimulating the mind, intellect, and body” (manobuddhidehasaṃvejanam; CaCi 6.9.29cd). A person might also be tied up tightly, though gently, with cloth (rather than rope), and confined to a dark room from which dangerous objects like iron rods and wooden sticks have been removed. Other kinds of shock therapies include shouting angrily at the patient, terrorizing him with the help of the local police who threaten to arrest or even execute him, having snakes that have had their fangs removed bite him, and threatening the patient with tamed (if still frightening) lions and elephants.218 At the same time, the victim should be given presents, reassurance, and consolation by friends, and exposure to emotions opposite from the one on which the patient is obsessing—passion, grief, fear, anger, exhilaration, jealousy, and greed are mentioned—that might help turn the mind in a different direction. The principles of these largely exotic treatments appear to be, first, to rebuild the mind and body with medicines that address both the humoral imbalance and the personality affliction; second, to bring the patient out of his or her condition by exposure to positive emotions; third, to shock the patient out of his or her obsessions; and, fourth, to bring a constant undercurrent of support and consolation to the patient. All of these should “lead to a state of mental normalcy by countering memory loss.”219

Thus, a full arsenal of treatments is brought to bear on possession. CaSū 11.54 defines the three areas of treatment mentioned at the beginning of this chapter: daivavyapāśraya, yuktivyapāśraya, and sattvāvajaya: “Daivavyapāśraya indicates the use of mantras, herbs, gemstones, auspicious offerings, gifts of food, fire offerings, scriptural observance, expiatory rites, fasting, chanting of hymns, surrender to deities, and pilgrimage. Yuktivyapāśraya indicates proper food, medicine and [other] substances. Sattvāvajaya is the holding back of the mind from harmful objects.”220 The last of these, sattvāvajaya, is not mentioned beyond this, possibly because it was regarded as implicit in proper observation of daivavyapāśraya.221 Thus, the texts describe in detail only the first two, at least by name. Much later in his text, as a conclusion to his section on treatment for unmāda, Caraka expands on his description of daivavyapāśrayacikitsā. As a partial remedy for unmāda, he enjoins,

One should perform pujā, offer sacrifice [bali], give offerings of food, ritually apply collyrium sanctified by mantras, and perform pacification rituals, Vedic sacrifice, repetition of divine name, rituals for auspicious occasions, and expiatory ritual. Worshipping Īśvara [viz. Śiva], the lord of the universe, the leader of bhūtas, constantly and with effort, one becomes victorious over the fear born of unmāda. One should perform puja to Rudra’s attendants [gaṇaḥ] called pramathas, who roam about in the world, thereby releasing them from various forms of unmāda. Exogenous possession [unmāda] becomes pacified [prasamam] through sacrifice, auspicious actions, fire ritual, wearing amulets that are healing because they contain appropriate herbs, observing truthfulness and good conduct, performing penance [tapas], developing knowledge, becoming charitable, observance of scriptural limits and vows, through honoring deities, cows, brahmans, and gurus, and through the application of perfected mantras and medicines. (CaCi 6.9.89–94)

Caraka’s exposition of the “rational treatment” (yuktivyapāsrayacikitsā) of unmāda consists largely of descriptions of medicinal preparations used to treat multiple conditions, most of them vāta debilitations.222 Because, according to Āyurveda, vāta evolves into prāṇa, it is in many ways a more fundamental doṣa than pitta or kapha. This is why, according to many practitioners, treatment for vāta derangement is more capable of abetting a cure for pitta or kapha conditions than treatment for one of the latter two would be for healing vāta debilitation.

This may also explain why ghee-based herbal preparations are prescribed as a remedy for unmāda in general, for one whose “mind is struck by a bhūta” (bhutopahatacitta), for bad luck (alakṣmī), for transgression (papa), and for demonic seizure (rakṣoghna). These preparations are also said to destroy all grahas (sarvagrahavināśanam; CaCi 6.9.41d). Ghee is believed to act directly to alleviate vāta and pitta debilitation, while taken in moderation it does not exacerbate kapha debilitation. Because of the esoteric nature of the descriptions of ghee-based preparations, and the extensive lists of ingredients used in their preparation, I can here offer only a brief description. To begin with, most of the preparations consist of a large number of herbs mixed with ghee. However, a few special, relatively simple, recipes require “old ghee” (purāṇaṃ ghṛtam). Caraka states that ten-year-old ghee used as a base is capable of rectifying all the doṣas and eliminating grahas. Ghee older than ten years is called prapurāṇa (very old), and ghee which is a hundred years old can cure any disease: “just the sight, touch, or smell of this casts out all grahas.”223

This practice is still current. In the eighteenth century, when the British finally defeated the Peshwas in Pune, they are said to have found a large number of pots of prapurāṇa ghee in Shanwar Wada, the fortress in the center of the old city. With respect to its manufacture, I am informed that “you must make sure that it is totally cooked, meaning that all the water is evaporated, and then it must be kept very dry. Then it begins to age.”224 Other informants in India have told me that the production of purāṇa-ghṛtam, which includes the manufacture and vigilant protection of ghee, occurs elsewhere as well. It is stored in large clay pots lined on the outside with copper or bell metal (kāṃsya), and was once a relatively common āyurvedic practice.

In an ensuing discussion of treatments for apasmara, also said to be effective against demonic infestation and other kinds of unmāda, Caraka prescribes a large number of animal products to be mixed into the preparations. Most common are recipes containing pañcagavya, the “five products of the cow”: milk, sour yogurt, ghee, urine, and liquid squeezed from dung.225 Goat’s or cow’s urine is also frequently mentioned as an ingredient independent of pañcagavya. One recipe calls for a number of herbs to be mixed with cow’s or goat’s urine along with leech excrement, ash from incinerated goat’s hair, donkey bone, elephant’s toenail, and hair from a cow’s tail (CaCi 6.10.39–40). From a modern perspective such recipes appear to be exotic, to say the least. However, Caraka and others probably did not include them for shock value, except possibly to shock an offending graha; a patient suffering from convulsions or any kind of mental disorder quite likely was not able to identify the ingredients in these preparations. More likely, animal products were deemed more antithetical to the possessing spirits, thus indirectly influencing, and even rectifying, humoral imbalances.226

Suśruta offers greater detail on antidotes to specific grahas (SuUt 6.60.29–37), as well as a number of more generally applicable remedies. The latter are not as profuse as are found in Caraka, but the attention paid to individual grahas indicates that Susruta emerges from a different, if related, medical tradition than Caraka, an oft-noted fact. Susruta states that grahas are nourished by the color red; thus, they should be given gifts of red clothes and offerings of red flowers, meat, and blood. The eight grahas mentioned by Susruta should be pacified with these and other appropriate items in rituals held in a temple (for a devagraha), at a crossroad (for an asura), amid cows (for a gandharva), in a pleasant room (for a yakṣa), by a river (for a pitṛgraha or a nāga), at a crossroad or in a dense forest (for a rakṣas), and in an abandoned house (for a piśāca). If these offerings do not succeed in alleviating the possession, the next recourse is fumigation therapy. One of these fumigants consists of goat, bear, porcupine, and owl skin mixed with asafoetida and goat’s urine. Another consists of oil (taila, unspecified, but sesame is usually the default oil) mixed with feces of a donkey, mule, owl, camel, dog, vulture, crow, or pig. Most of the recipes, however, consist of a mixture of herbs and animal products, including bile from different animals, including fish and cow, and the nails of various feral beasts, including a variety of large and small felines, alligator, mongoose, and so on. Like Caraka, Susruta may have selected these creatures in part because of their perceived dominant doṣa, but probably largely because they were feral and could thus overpower the afflicting graha.

Susruta adds a chapter (6.62) on the diagnostics of unmāda according to humoral imbalance. It is not necessary to enter into the details here, but it suffices to note that the diagnoses comply with the characteristics of the grahas and that the details of the shock therapy are in essential agreement with those given by Caraka (a few details are added, such as whipping or tying the victim with chains), and a bit more dietary advice is given.

Kāsyapa Kalpasthānam, chapter 1, lists a large number of recipes to be used as demonifuges, for example, “A fumigant [dhūpa] named Uttama [Best] is recommended for people overcome by pretas and pūtanās [indicating all balagrahas]. It should be prepared from ghee, siddhārthaka [?], honey, sheep’s horn, goat’s milk, donkey’s hair and urine, and soma” (KSKa 1.11–12).227

The AH Uttarasthāna (AH-Ut) 6.3 discusses balagrahas and recommends an array of possible treatments for such invasion, including various fumigants, medicated ghee, decoctions for nocturnal baths (snapana), and ritual. Much of this is found in Caraka and Susruta, but the corpus is here expanded. AH-Ut 6.5, titled bhūtapratiṣedha (repulsing bhūtas), again covers a gamut of remedies, including recipes for pills (guḍa) to ward off insanity (6.5.15–17), again with an exotic mixture of vegetal and animal products, special offerings for most of the species of offending grahas listed in 6.4 (translated above), mantras invoking Dvādasabhuja (Twelve-Armed) Īśvara or Āryāvalokita Nātha, the mahāmāyūrī mantra (cf. discussion of the Bower manuscript above), and worship of various other multiforms of Śiva, including Bhūtesa, Sthānu, and the latter’s attendants, called pramathas (agitators, shakers).228

## The Cakradatta: Pharmacopeia
As an example of the discourse of healing in the āyurvedic text passages on possession, I draw on the Cikitsāsaṃgraha, otherwise called Cakradatta, a therapeutic text of the mid-eleventh century, thus placing it chronologically in the third tier of āyurvedic textuality.229 The author, Cakrapāṇidatta, is best known for his commentary on Caraka. But he also wrote this independent treatise, which became widely followed in his native Bengal. Although much of the material is drawn from Caraka, it updates and situates it in a healing locus more definitively systematic, as Āyurveda had by then become a sastra with a long and distinguished tradition. This compendium of āyurvedic therapeutics is conspicuous for its rich pharmacopeia. Although it does not come out particularly strongly in the passage at hand, the Cakradatta surpassed its predecessors in integrating tantric medicine and practices, which include mercurial and other mineral-based preparations and a tantric repertoire of mantra and yantra, into the formulary and ritual recommendations of Caraka. This text probably came as close as any to representing a complete form of Āyurveda, in north India at least, at the time of its composition. Chapter 20 of the Cakradatta addresses unmāda, distinguishing psychological dysfunction with identifiable causes (nija) from exogenously induced (āgantuka) unmāda. In discussing the latter, Cakrapāṇidatta describes the pharmacopeia and mentions certain aspects of ritual treatment.

44. The practice of consuming ghee, etc., as well as the use of mantra, etc., are introduced for [treatment of] the exogenous variety [of unmāda]. The physician [bhiṣak], having undergone his own purification, should treat exogenous unmāda with ceremonies of worship [puja], normal sacrificial oblations [bali], nonsacrificial offerings [upahāra], vedic fire ritual [iṣṭi], non-vedic fire ritual [homa], mantra repetition, ritual application on the head or body of colored or scented salve or paste [añjana], etc., each according to its respective ritual injunctions.  
45. A salve [añjana] prepared from long pepper [pippalī], black pepper [marica], black sulphurous salt [saindhava], honey, and bovine bile [gopitta] destroys extreme insanity caused by all kinds of spirits.
46. A pill [guḍika] made from dāruharidrā and honey in the lunar asterism called puṣya is [powdered and] made into a salve.230  
47. Alternatively, marica mixed with bovine bile that has been placed in the sun for one month may be beneficial as a salve. This is used for distorted vision [hallucinations] when memory is lost due to imbalance of humors or spirit possession.  
48. A fumigant [dhūpa] that wards off enchantment [ḍākinya], etc., made of neem leaves, vacā,231 asafoetida [hiṇgu], sloughed-off snake skin [sarpanirmoka], and mustard seed, may be used to destroy madness caused by spirit possession.  
49. According to tradition, a fumigant [dhūpa] made of a ball packed together with cotton seeds, coppery eye of peacock feathers [mayūrapiccha], bṛhatī, and nirmālya, [added to a bundle consisting of] cinnamon [tvak], the soft extrusions at the joints of bamboo segments [vaṃśalocana], cat excrement [vṛṣadaṃsa-viṭ],232 grain husks, vacā, jatāmāṃsī,233 and sloughed-off snake skin [ahinirmoka], and equal quantities of [powdered] cow’s horn and dvipadanta, asafoetida [hiṇgu], and black pepper [marica], alleviates fever that arises due to possession [āvesa] caused by the skanda entities [skandonmāda], piśācas, rākṣasas, and suras.  
1. A nasal preparation [nasyam] of roots and ripened fruit of aindrī [indravāruṇī] and cow urine234 allows victory over brahmarākṣasas. A nasal preparation of svetā and ricewater [jyeṣṭhāmbu] mixed with ghee wards off bhūtas.  
2. In the case of madness caused by deities [deva], sages [ṛṣi], deceased ancestors [pitṛ], and gandharvas, an intelligent person should avoid irritant salves, etc., and other harsh measures.  
3. The symptomatology of the departure of madness is clarity of the senses, intellect, self, and mind, as well as normalization of the dhātus.  

We have seen many of the exotic substances recommended here in earlier texts. Among them, cat excrement (which may have been dried and powdered), sloughed-off snake skin (ahinirmoka), and the coppery eye of the peacock feather (mayūrapiccha) were probably classified, at least informally, as vāta (wind-reducing substances) and thus antispasmodics that at the same time rebuild afflicted systems.235 In present-day Kerala the vaidyas praise classical recipes like this one. They employ the herbal ingredients recommended, such as vacā, black pepper, asafoetida, neem leaves, and cinnamon, but use other substances in place of the animal products, including garlic, white śaṇkhapuṣpi, and chili.

Although unmāda could result from a specified imbalance of any of the three doṣas, most of the evidence encountered in both the āyurvedic and tantric texts suggests that externally induced (āgantuka) negative possession is vāta-based more often than it is pitta- or kapha-based. Among the symptoms of spirit possession described in these texts that are more characteristic of vāta debilitation are excessive facial gestures, uncontrolled body movements, stammering, cold limbs, and attention-deficit disorders. These symptoms, we should recall, align closely with Caraka’s general description of unmāda cited earlier, which, more than the other doṣas, is a description of vāta debilitation. Nevertheless, afflictions more often associated with other doṣas are also found in descriptions of the various grahas, as we have seen. Primary among these is extreme anger, more frequently associated with debilitated pitta. In all cases, however, it appears that antispasmodics, prescribed primarily to mitigate vāta debilitation, are recommended for alleviation of spirit possession.
