+++
title = "08 Possession and Exorcism in Contemporary Āyurveda"

+++
Much of the following is based on research conducted in Kerala in 2002 and 2004. I undertook this research after hearing a rumor from a usually reliable source that a number of āyurvedic physicians and tāntrikas (or mantravādins, as they are called in Kerala) still follow the practices of possession and exorcism outlined in the ĪŚP. On close investigation, I learned that this is not true. Nevertheless, it is likely that some of the current practices are derivative of what is found there or at least from a complex heritage of texts and practices that gave rise to the ĪŚP.

My primary conclusions, after speaking extensively to more than a dozen highly placed vaidyas, mantravādins, and jyotiṣis (astrologers), are that: (1) notions of bhūtas and bhūtavidyā are substantially unchanged from what appear in the classical texts;236 (2) most of the clients are women, including a large number of Muslims; (3) an entrenched system of referral among the three groups of practitioners, which constitutes a mental health-care delivery system of considerable sophistication, is still very much in place;237 (4) the groups freely borrow both textuality and ritual apparatus from one another. A full ethnography of the possession events that I witnessed in Kerala is beyond the scope of the present work.238 Instead, I present a summary account of the points mentioned above, particularly the latter two, the system of referral and the shared textuality. These are most important for our purposes because they are crucial in assembling an epistemology that encourages the development of a complex and integrated healing tradition among the vaidyas, mantravādins, and astrologers of central and northern Kerala, particularly in districts of central Malabar, north of Cochin.

Two lineages of āyurvedic practice are currently found in these and the districts to the south, from Kollam (Quilon) in south-central Kerala to Kozhikode (Calicut) and beyond in the northern districts of the state and from the coast to Palakkad (Palghat) in the hills of eastern Kerala and beyond to Coimbatore, a city of over a million people in Tamilnadu, barely fifteen kilometers from the Kerala border. The two lineages are the aṣṭavaidya tradition, transmitted for centuries by Nambudiri brahmans, and the non-brahman tradition established by Vaidyaratnam P. S. Varier in 1902 in the town of Kottakkal in Mallapuram District. The latter has since spread throughout Kerala and is now creating a discernible presence on the āyurvedic map as far north as Delhi.239 Both lineages maintain the AH as their primary text.

My most valuable informants were Vaidyamadham Narayanan Nambudiri of Mezhathur and Kumaraswami Nambudiripad of Kāttumataṇ Mannā, both in Palakkad District. The latter is well known locally as an expert in mantravidyā to whom Vaidyamadham occasionally refers patients diagnosed with exogenous unmāda. Vaidyamadham, who learned Āyurveda from his father in the aṣṭavaidya tradition, is one of Kerala’s most-respected āyurvedic practitioners. His practices and opinions carry considerable weight.240 I spoke with him at length and observed some of his practices. As is the case with the other vaidyas in the predominantly Muslim districts of Malabar, most of Vaidyamadham’s patients are Muslims, including those who come to him for treatment of mental dysfunction or illness.

After observing a fair amount of practiced, but nevertheless unpredictable and captivating (to both ethnographer and participant), possession ritual at the Chottanikkara “Bhagavathy” temple, a well known goddess temple about thirty kilometers east of Cochin, where the use of puttalīs is common, it became clear to me that most of the victims were girls and young women from about fifteen to about twenty-five years old. This is in keeping with ethnographic reports throughout India. The women exhibited the classic symptoms of possession on having darshan of the goddess, exhibiting rhythmic rotating of the head with hair unbraided, wild body movements, shouting and thrashing about, and so on. Although this temple is noted for both possession and exorcism, what I observed was not entirely “negative” possession, even if there was undoubtedly a negative onus cast on the girls by their families. I say this because their apparent dissociation is in many cases accompanied by palpable states of exhilaration, rendering it more accurately a highly focused, if at a certain point uncontrollable, liminal state, albeit one without an apparent oracular component. Were it mere dissociation, as most scholars understand it, this complexity would be negated, particularly as the girls in question appear to maintain some awareness of their complex state of consciousness and the transformations (albeit temporary) wrought on their persons as a result of their possession. The temptation to express themselves through possession states appears to contain an element of choice, at least some of the time; even if many of the girls are “clinically” ill, the temptation to “act possessed,” to unleash this “spirit” within themselves to the point at which their self-imposed liminality overwhelms their socialized personalities, includes critical elements of excitement and fascination.
Similarly, their psychophysical attitude or comportment (bhava), regardless of whether a product of illness, is clearly liberating, at least in the short run. In either case, whether the possession fits into indigenous categories of ecstasy or derangement (or both), the experience is valorized, sanctified, and healed or exorcised by the goddess. In cases of negative possession, the evident attraction of this kind of ecstatic healing environment is that the uncontrollable meandering and eclipse of the socialized personality are given an opportunity to express themselves. This is exemplified in girls who appear to engage in both sides of a dialogue, in different voices and intonations, in which the goddess and the possessing spirits argue or even fight. If the possessed person is deemed by the healer, family members, or ritual officiant to be ready to expel the spirit, and if adequate administrative and ritual preparations are made, including payments and the acquisition of the proper material items (including a puttalī), a brief ceremony is then performed. Several regular attendees who had seen this ceremony (I did not witness it) described it to me. In it, I was told, the officiant drives the bhūtam, sometimes in the form of the puttalī, into the tree with a nail or railway spike in the presence of the afflicted individual and accompanying family members, after which the victim beats her (or, less frequently, his) fists or head on it. As expected, this act is less practical than symbolic and “ritual”; the human head cannot beat a nail or railway spike into a tree without causing irreparable damage. Thus, we must assume, the nail has been placed in a hole already drilled or otherwise hammered into the tree. The purpose of beating the nail with the head or fists, then, is to provide conviction and a sense of personal immediacy to the exorcism and, perhaps, to draw blood as an attractive offering to the goddess.

It is important to note that the girls (and a few men) at Chottanikkara are Hindus (and possibly a few Christians), and their conditions did not appear to be irreversable. By contrast, most of the victims of unmāda who attend the clinics of the local vaidyas are either Muslims who would not travel to Chottanikkara or members of other communities with serious psychological dysfunction. Vaidyas of both the aṣṭavaidya and Varier traditions, when repeatedly asked why most of their patients suffering from unmāda diagnosed as āgantuka were young women, gave one response with regularity: Young girls did not modernize as seamlessly as young men, and this opened them up to possession. This was not a satisfying answer, and it gave the impression that they were not telling the whole story. Finally, Vaidyamadham Nambudiri told me that these girls frequently are depressed, abused, and isolated, and suffer from drug addiction. Much of the abuse is sexual, he said, and occurs within the family; they have no outlet for expression in their families, and thus they are psychically weakened and become susceptible to possession, a situation greatly exacerbated by drug addiction. Regardless of the identity of the intoxicant, which from its description could be an opiate, he treats the victims with his arsenal of āyurvedic medicines, or refers them to Kumaraswami Nambudiripad for ritual treatment.

Kumaraswami was also very forthcoming with me, and I asked him what he does with these girls. On the whole, he counsels them and uses his position to establish a comforting and positive rapport with them. Very rarely does he perform tantric rituals for these girls. More than ritual, he says, they need someone to talk to, an admission that he has little ability or authority to deal with their actual problems. But Vaidyamadham, a physician, takes a more proactive āyurvedic approach. He prescribes fumigation (dhūma) with “foul-smelling substances,” three times a day for up to fifteen minutes, usually for several consecutive days. Although the vaidyas of Kerala continue to praise classical recipes for fumigants, such as the ones we saw in the Cakradatta, they employ only some of the herbal ingredients recommended, including vacā, black pepper, asafoetida, neem leaves, and cinnamon. They use other substances in place of the animal products, including garlic, white śaṇkhapuṣpi,241 and hot chili. Fumigation is administered on the premises of his clinic by his trained staff. He also prescribes emesis or induced vomiting (vamana) in which the patient expels the offending bhūta after drinking a concoction of goat’s milk, white śaṇkhapuṣpī, and a few other unnamed herbal substances (this concoction is used by several vaidyas in Kerala), oil massage (a specialty of Kerala āyurveda), and, if necessary, mantravidyā, in which case he refers the patient to Kumaraswami Nambudiripad.

If Mr. Nambudiripad or certain other members of his family who are privy to the meticulously protected family secrets deems mantravidyā to be advisable, they will counsel the victims and prescribe for them certain kinds of medicated ghee that help eliminate the bhūta. In the āyurvedic idiom employed by Vaidyamadham and Kumaraswami, drinking ghee (snehapānam) and inducing vomiting (vamana) are effective therapies for unmāda because they “boost buddhi [intelligence].” They manufacture their ghee-based medicines themselves and subsequently potentiate them by offering them to their deities, Bhagavatī (Durgā) and Gaṇapati, with mantras known only to them. Only then are they dispensed to their clients. In fact, irrespective of whatever ritualizing they might enact on the patient, their main form of mantravidyā is empowering these medicines with mantras.

I asked both Narayanan Nambudiri and Kumaraswami Nambudiripad whether their mantravidyā and practices of exorcism derive from the ĪŚP or other similar tantric compendia that were composed in Sanskrit long ago in Kerala. They had heard of this and other similar texts, including the (Viṣa-)Nārāyaṇīya, and knew, vaguely, that they contained mantras and instructions on possession and exorcism. However, they had not read any of them. Because of the secrecy of their traditions, I have no way of knowing whether their mantras resemble those found in these texts. I can only conjecture that the tradition of employing mantravidyā in exorcism remains unbroken in Kerala and that this tradition has always allowed considerable flexibility and variation, but with only a small number of survivals into the past few generations.

Kumaraswami Nambudiripad, as well as members of an unrelated family of Nambudiris from Poomkutil Mannā near Manjeri, in Mallapuram District, about fifty difficult kilometers away, state that they learned their mantravidyā and associated healing practices from their forefathers through direct observation and instruction, not from books or Sanskrit manuscripts.242 Kumaraswami, as suggested, is not the recipient of any immediate Sanskrit tradition. He regards himself as a mantravādin, not a tāntrika. In Kerala, he explained, tāntrikas perform temple ritual with the help of Tantras and Āgamas. He hails from one of four Nambudiri families of mantravādins ritually affiliated with the Mookambika goddess temple of Kannur, in northern Kerala. Not all four families, he says, actively practice mantravāda. Mantravādins specialize in treatments that require personal attention outside the temple. These treatments need not be based on known sastra. On Sundays, he says, more than a hundred people come to his Mannā for treatment of bhut-bādhā. The mannā itself is picturesque, consisting of a large family house at the bottom of a long driveway sloping down from the main road. Next to it is a well-maintained temple. These are surrounded by several acres of lush and well-tended fruit trees, with one prominent pipal tree in the front yard, which, says Kumaraswami, houses a chāttan.

This is a spirit indigenous to Kerala. All my informants agree that this is a class (gaṇa) of bhūtas, specifically a janglī bhūta (primitive, undomesticated jungle spirit).243 Among the symptoms of harassment by a chāttan are rocks falling inexplicably on one’s roof or large amounts of hair found in one’s food (specifically in ḍāl). A chāttan is also explained as “a force, something like a yakṣa.” It is not always malevolent and could even be protective if regularly and properly appeased, which, it is said, is accomplished by leaving votive offerings for it at a shrine constructed beneath certain large trees. In addition, certain people are called chāttans. They are most often depicted as members of backward classes who are short, dark, and demonic in a modest, nonfatal manner. They practice chāttan upāsana, meaning that they are possessed by a chāttan and practice chāttan jādu (black magic associated with a chāttan). However, even Nambudiris are capable of performing chāttan upāsana. In Thrissur District live several chāttan maṭhas or extended houses of people, mostly related, who are trained through family or lineage tradition in ritual appeasement of chāttans by making offerings at their shrines. Although leaving votive offerings beneath trees appears to be a simple matter, it is not so simple that any untrained person can do it. Another person informed me that his father once called in a Nambudiri from Kāttumatan Mannā to perform chāttan sevā, as the Nambudiris call it. His father believed that he was being bothered by a chāttan, as his businesses were going bad and illnesses were occurring in the family.

Kumaraswami’s clients report that they are afflicted by enemies, ancestral spirits (pitṛs), and chāttans. When they come to him, he recites simple mantras, most of them inaudibly, talks to the client, ties a black string around the wrist—a protective device that lasts several months before it weathers away, and, as mentioned above, gives medicated and ritually empowered medicinal ghee. Most referrals are through astrologers (jyotiṣī), but some come from vaidyas, such as Vaidyamadham. Kumaraswami says he knows only pratihāra (exorcism), mantra, and other procedures that “strike against” invasive beings; he does not claim to know medicine or astrology.

Vaidyamadham Nambudiri and Kumaraswami Nambudiripad also accept clients referred from astrologers. I therefore contacted a few highly recommended practitioners of this ubiquitous South Asian art form in Coimbatore and Kozhikode. Astrology and priesthood have had a long association in India,244 as have astrology and medicine, especially in South India. One of the convergences is textual. Perhaps the most important text of prasna or horary astrology (see Chapter 11), at least in Kerala, is the Praśnamārga (PrMā). The twelfth chapter of this complex text discusses the influence of the planets on health. Most of the chapter (verses 18–62) is dedicated to a discussion of unmāda and apasmāra. Verses 18–20 divide disease (roga) into the two familiar divisions of nija and āgantuka. Nija diseases may be either physical (sarirottha) or mental (cittottha), while those classified as āgantuka are unnatural, though they may be born of either visible or invisible causes (dṛṣṭādṛṣṭanimittajāḥ). The PrMā then describes the astrological configurations in a person’s natal horoscope (kuṇḍali) that indicate mental dysfunction. Space limitations prevent the discussion of the astrological significations here; I can only note that if a critical mass of discord exists between the planets, houses, and signs that govern one’s mind, emotions, general state of well-being, social capacities, and tendencies toward conflict, then mental or emotional instability of the visible (dṛṣṭa) type results. If these conditions are not met, and there is still instability, then the unmāda must be judged to be the work of obstructive spirits (bādhakagrahasambhavāḥ; 12.24d). The PrMā and its commentaries link planetary discord with emotional instability, untoward life-style choices, curses (sāpa-), black magic (abhicāra-), and other kinds of incidental decline, including social ostracism, into a fully evidentiary and cross-referenced whole, which is to say as consistent with the general presentation of astrology as a tightly woven epistemological or sāstraic system.245 According to my āyurvedic informants in Kerala and Coimbatore, the AH recommends astrology as an adjunct to Āyurveda. Their authority for this is AHSū 1.31c, which suggests that healing is facilitated when the planets are congenial (graheṣv anuguṇeṣu). This is widely quoted as a justification for employing astrology as a diagnostic tool.246

The PrMā (12:34a–c) describes the causes of unmāda in language familiar from the āyurvedic texts: excessive joy, desire, fear, grief, eating forbidden or unclean food, and the wrath of the gods and gurus. After breaking down the symptoms of unmāda according to the afflicted doṣa, the PrMā describes possession by a devagraha in familiar terms, but does not name other grahas. Instead, the text personifies as female grahas a dozen symptoms of seizure (apasmāra, 12.53–54): Svāsanā (Gasping), Malina (Dirtying), Nidrā (Sleep), Jṛmbhikā (Yawning), Anaśanā (Not Eating), Trāsinī (Fear), Mohinī (Enchantress), Rodanī (Weeping), Krodhanī (Anger), Tāpanī (Excitable), Śoṣaṇī (Dryness), and Dhvaṃsinī (Destructress). Throughout this section the PrMā prescribes different kinds of medicated ghee, including pañcagavya, and various kinds of sacrifice and homa. Most of these are to be administered only by qualified āyurvedic physicians and tantric ritual specialists.

One ritual, however, deserves special praise in the PrMā: the mṛtyuñjaya homa (13.36–39). This consists of a simple burnt offering of rice, black sesame seeds, and other uncooked grains, roots, fruits, and so on, with the so-called mahāmṛtyuñjaya mantra, the mantra that “conquers death.” This is perhaps the most commonly recited mantra for homa in India. The mantra, oṃ tryàmbakam yajāmahe sugandhím puṣṭivárdhanam | urvārukám iva bándhanān mṛtyór mukṣīya mmtāt| (We make offerings to Tryambaka (Rudra), the fragrant, increaser of prosperity; like a cucumber from its stem, from death may I be loosened, not from immortality) (ṚV 7.59.12, TS 1.8.6.2, etc.).247 The PrMā 13.36ab states that this ritual should be practiced to pacify all diseases, especially sharp fever (tivrajvara) and those brought on by black magic (abhicāra; 13.37), a category in which most spirit possession generally abides. This belief, as mentioned earlier, continues to the present day, as Dwyer’s survey at Bālājī attests. In Kerala, this takes the form of kaiviṣa, a Malayalam compound meaning “poison from someone’s hand” (Mal. kai [hand]; Skt. viṣa [poison]). In this form of abhicāra, a poison that is said to bring on unmāda or apasmāra is given surreptitiously to a person to drink or swallow, often with milk. The poison may be an ensorcelled hair, iron powder, aconite, or an insect’s body. Thus, the PrMā, standing outside the textuality of Āyurveda and Tantra, at least formally if not practically, actively invites the participation of experts in these two allied bodies of knowledge to treat what is to this text primarily astrological affliction.248
