+++
title = "09 Diagnosing Possession"

+++
Beyond astrology, and beyond our concern with practices in Kerala, it is relevant to ask how is nija unmāda (mental illness with traceable physiological or psychological origins) distinguished from āgantuka unmāda (mental illness believed to be the result of possession)? In the case of nija unmāda, the vaidya takes a case history and undertakes a medical evaluation. In most cases, the cause is readily acknowledged: family problems, a death in the family, financial pressure, a life-threatening illness. The usual problems are depression and anxiety, as elsewhere in the world, and the unmāda is usually diagnosed as a vāta affliction and treated accordingly.

The tool most commonly employed for diagnosing āgantuka unmāda is observation. What vaidyas look for is abrupt and specifically defined behavioral change. However, this is not usually accepted as the final word, as most vaidyas try to verify these findings by taking a detailed case history and initiating a full medical evaluation. Never, to the best of my knowledge, except at last-resort places that specialize in exorcism, such as Bālājī, is there an assumption of possession. Besides observation, the diagnostic tools ordinarily used to check for āgantuka unmāda are pulse diagnosis, urinalysis, and the detection of physical signs of different families of spirits. For example, Clifford reports, “If the brightness of the eyes has deteriorated, if there are changes in the blood vessels in the whites of the eyes, if there are very small black dots on the whites of the eyes, or if the eyes look blurred or scratched, these are all signs of possession by a kingly or royal spirit (rgyal-po).”249 With respect to pulse, according to some of my informants in Pune, one should stare at the third eye of the patient, then take one’s own pulse. If the radial pulse is strongest, the unmāda is judged to be nija; if the ulnar pulse dominates, it is believed to be spirit possession (bhūtonmāda); if the medial artery pulse is dominant, then the unmāda is said to be caused by possession by an ancestral spirit (pitṛgraha). The urinalysis procedure reported by the same vaidyas is as follows. First, fill a cup with the patient’s urine. Then carefully place at the center of the urine one drop of sesame oil. If the oil flows to the south, then the unmāda is caused by a malevolent spirit, to the east by a devagraha, to the west by an animal spirit, but if it flows to the north then it is regarded as internal (nija).

This procedure, called tailabindu-parīkṣā (examination through a drop of oil), is related to a divinatory technique of urinalysis described in an eighteenth-century text called Yogaratnākara (YR), which is an excellent example of the integration of Āyurveda with tantric principles.250 The practice described to me in Pune is not found in the YR, but it appears to emerge out of a body of practice that is old and gave rise to the practices described in the YR. The passage in question is contained in the first chapter of the YR, in a section called mūtraparīkṣā (examination of urine). It will be instructive to give a near-verbatim account of the passage, because it illustrates the manner in which divination has been accepted in a medical work of the past few centuries. This is given neither to discount nor to accept the findings of the text and derivative practices, but to note that principles of a very different scientific paradigm were applied.

In the last hour of the last part [yāma] of the night, a vaidya should collect the urine and store it in a glass [kācamaya] vessel. He should then examine it after sunrise. The first part of the stream of urine should not be used, but the middle part of the stream should be collected. Only in this way can the vaidya determine the cause of the illness and its remedy. One should then take a drop of oil with a blade of grass and carefully place it in the middle of the vessel of urine. If the oil spreads, the disease is curable. If it does not spread, then the disease is difficult to cure. If it floats randomly on the surface, then the disease is incurable. If it flows to east, good health will be restored quickly. Movement to the south indicates a fever that will subside only gradually. If it flows to the north, a cure is definite. Movement of the oil to the west indicates happiness and health. If it flows to the northeast, then the patient will die in one month. If it flows to the southeast or southwest or if it breaks up, death is inevitable. If it flows to the northwest, then the patient will die even if treated with the best medicines [sudhā]. The same is true if it outlines the form of a plow, a tortoise, a buffalo, a beehive, a headless man, a part of an arm or leg, a weapon, an axe, a wooden pestle or spear, an arrow, a mace, or a crossroad with only three roads. In such cases it is better to do nothing at all. If it takes the shape of a goose, a duck, a pond [tāḍāga], a lotus, an elephant, a chowrie [cāmara], an umbrella, an arch, or a mansion, then good health will definitely be restored. If the drop of oil wanders aimlessly, there is possession by a family member [kuladoṣa] or a spirit [pretadoṣa]. If it resembles a human being or two skulls [mastakadvayam], there is possession by a bhūta [bhūtadosa] and bhūtavidyā should be applied. If it takes the shape of snake, the condition is due to vāta aggravation. If it takes the shape of an umbrella, the condition is due to pitta aggravation. If it takes the shape of pearls, the condition is due to kapha aggravation.251

In addition to the fumigants and varieties of medicated ghee prescribed for alleviation of bhutonmāda, some vaidyas in Maharashtra prescribe bhasma or ash from incinerated emerald (pannabhasma) or from the nine gems (navaratna) associated with the planets.252 Emerald is associated with the planet Mercury, which in astrology is associated with the mind. Thus, in astrological thought, an infusion of emerald in its subtlest form, alchemically produced bhasma, is believed to strengthen the influence of Mercury and, consequently, the mind.253 I am unable to find a prescription for this in any āyurvedic text. However, Indian alchemical literature of the last three hundred years has been insufficiently researched.254 I should add that these prescriptions do not appear to be followed in Kerala, where the physicians inform me that they do not use such bhasmas.

However, the most consistent statements on the application of pulse and urinalysis for diagnosis of possession come from Tibetan sources. Clifford states that these are not found in the Gyu-zhi. Her sources, rather, were contemporary practitioners, who probably learned these from other texts and from oral tradition. The most likely source is a series of thangkas that is used as a textbook, along with copious written and oral commentary, in Tibetan medical colleges.255 Three of the thangkas depict (among other things) divinatory diagrams that appear within the larger maṇḍalas that constitute the thangkas themselves. These smaller diagrams are circles trisected vertically and horizontally, thus yielding nine divisions, the central one being a square.256 To produce this maṇḍala or yantra, a circle is inscribed on a small mobile object, possibly a glass or copper plate. On this, the grid is created by placing four thin sticks one-third of the way into the circle from both sides, the top, and the bottom. The resulting nine sections are imagined as a turtle lying on its back, with its head toward the north, as a mirror of male urine, and as a turtle sitting right side up, with its head toward the south, as a mirror of female urine. The nine partitions represent the residence of sadak (sa-bdog; ground-owner demons), said to come from the Bön tradition.257 The center represents the self. Surrounding it, clockwise from the northeast corner are, in the case of the upside-down turtle, the ground-owner demons represented as gods (lHa), ancestors (pha-mes), cremation ground demons (dur-sa), house demons (khang), field demons (shing), progeny (bu-tsha), ghosts (gDon), and humans (mi). In the case of the right-side-up turtle, they are, from the northeast, cremation ground demons, ancestors, gods, humans, ghosts, progeny, field demons, and house demons. The category at the center, namely, self, requires explanation. According to the Fundamentals of Tibetan Medicine, a widely used handbook, this represents “a spirit associated with a person with whom the patient is emotionally close, although not necessarily friendly.”258 This yantra is then placed over a bowl of urine. If a bubble that looks like a fisheye appears in the urine and settles beneath one of the partitions, then the identity of the invading spirit becomes known.
