+++
title = "10 Conclusions: Notes on the Textuality of Āyurveda"

+++
The recognition of disease-producing spirit possession in South Asia has an epochal history of more than three thousand years and an equally epic variation and complexity. It can be traced from the Atharvaveda, where unmāda was first discussed, to the early canonical texts of Caraka, Susruta, and Vāgbhaṭa, where diagnostics and treatment modalities were more formally discussed. Contemporaneous with these texts, it is discussed in the Mahābhārata and Buddhist medical treatises. From these sources it was dispersed to a variety of Tantras and āyurvedic texts beginning in the late first millennium and finally drifted into dharmasāstra and astrological literature. It will come as no surprise, then, that, given this deep history, the idea of negative, invasive spirits has not ceased in India. Rather, under the influence of thousands of years of new religious movements and sociopolitical formations, as well as updated scientific notions, it has been reconfigured and reintroduced in recent medical and paramedical texts, the latter represented by Tantras composed in the past few centuries. One of the chief characteristics of this history has been a flow of ideas on bhūtavidyā and bhūtonmāda from educated elites who control texts into the popular imaginaire and, conversely, from popular, non-Brahman, culture into texts. The juxtaposition of and exchange between classical and folk is, in fact, nowhere more evident than in the area of bhūtavidyā. It appears from the material presented copiously in the preceding pages that the banishment of the subaltern from much of classical discourse is a thin and tenuous construction or, perhaps more generously, an artifact of orthodox conditioning within the minds of both classical Indian and modern Western-trained scholars.

One of the dynamic aspects of bhūtavidyā, the dialectic between continuity and change, is the identity of possessing entities. The vedic literature recognizes an array of such beings, most of them male, including the gandharva, nāga, siddha, sādhya, vipra, yakṣa, rākṣasa, piśāca, and yātudhāna. Only rarely are female possessors mentioned in the Vedas, notably the apsaras, the wife of the gandharva. Many of these appear to be early instances of Sanskritization, imported into the pantheon of vedic deities as minor but essential players in a sumptuous cosmogony. Contemporaneous with the latter phases of the vedic period, the second half of the first millennium B.C.E. or perhaps a few centuries later, an alternative genus of female possessors appears to have been imported from popular culture into the MBh and the early canonical āyurvedic texts.259 These were the bālagrahas (child-snatchers) who attacked and possessed pregnant women and children. They were much more malevolent and far less playful and Sanskritic than the male grahas who preceded them in the literary record. Most grahas found in the bhūtavidyā sections of the āyurvedic texts, the Bower manuscript, the ĪŚP, the Madanamahārṇava, and, to a lesser extent, the ethnographies of Varanasi and the Maldives are male and described by their personalities. It is as if they have life histories that can be deciphered through their names and literary contexts. By contrast, the grahas of the MBh, the pediatric sections of the āyurvedic texts, and, to a great extent, those represented in popular culture, are female, usually demonesses known only by their names, with little discernible life history, such as Mukhamaṇḍikā and Lohitāyanī (MBh).260 The more general terms found in modern Indian culture, such as the bhavānī and the cuḍail, signify categories of demoness, rather than historically situated ones. This representation in popular culture is, however, consistent with the earliest vedic literature and with a number of intermediate genres in which minor goddesses are given much less definition than male gods or demigods.

Also evident in the modernization of the texts is an updating that has taken a turn perhaps unexpected by Caraka. It is clear, as Meulenbeld has pointed out, that Caraka and Susruta attempted to forge an empirical medical system, in part by expunging from their texts material from the AV and its supporting literature, such as the Kauśikasūtra, that was viewed as unscientific or otherwise opposed to the system that they were attempting to construct. However, with the rise of Tantra and the application of astrology to nonritual, personal situations, a good deal of material from these increasingly defined bodies of knowledge was adopted into āyurvedic literature and the discourse of āyurvedic practice, as the medical textuality of the seventeenth to twentieth centuries testifies. The tantric and astrological literature differs considerably from that associated with the AV and could not have been derived from it in any significant way. Rather, the infusion of textual elements of Tantra and astrology into medical texts, as well as the reverse, an infusion of medical textuality, including extensive passages on bhūtavidyā, into texts on astrology, Tantra, and karmavipāka, indicates a blurring of boundaries between these genres in the past five hundred years. Thus, Āyurveda has, in a limited and updated manner, come full circle. Caraka and Susruta might not approve, but the project of scientizing and sanitizing, as well as the introduction of Tantra and astrology into Indian popular culture have afforded them access into the expansive domain of Āyurveda. The evidence from Kerala, with its history of intertextuality and the overlapping concerns of vaidyas, mantravādins, and jyotiṣīs, appears to resist the notion that the rise of Western educational models, the ascendance of allopathic medicine, a national āyurvedic curriculum, and an increasing reliance on text rather than apprenticeship as authoritative,261 could end the diagnosis and treatment of exogenous mental illness any time soon.
