+++
title = "01 CENTRAL THEOLOGICAL AND PHILOSOPHICAL CHARACTERISTICS"

+++

An underlying theological assumption in texts celebrating the Mahādevī is that the ultimate reality in the universe is a powerful, creative, active, transcendent female being. The *Lalitā-sahasranāma* gives many names of the Mahādevī, and several of her epithets express this assumption. She is called, for example, the root of the world \(Jagatīkandā, name 325\), she who transcends the universe \(Viśvādhikā, 334\), she who has no equal \(Nirupamā, 389\), supreme ruler \(Parameśvarī, 396\), she who pervades all \(Vyāpinī, 400\), she who is immeasurable \(Aprameyā, 413\), she who creates innumerable universes \(Anekakoṭibrahmāṇḍajananī, 620\), she whose womb contains the universe \(Viśvagarbhā, 637\), she who is the support of all \(Sarvādhārā, 659\), she who is omnipresent \(Sarvagā, 702\), she who is the ruler of all worlds \(Sarvalokeśī, 758\), and she who supports the universe \(Viśvadhāriṇī, 759\). In the *Devī-Bhāgavata-purāṇa,* which also assumes the ultimate priority of the Mahādevī, she is said to be the mother of all, to pervade the three worlds, to be the support of all \(1.5.47–50\), to be the life force in all beings, to be the ruler of all beings \(1.5.51–54\), to be the only cause of the universe \(1.7.27\), to create Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva and to command them to perform their cosmic tasks \(3.5.4\), to be the root of the tree of the universe \(3.10.15\), and to be she who is supreme knowledge \(4.15.12\). The text describes her by many other names and phrases as it exalts her to a position of cosmic supremacy.

One of the central philosophic ideas underlying the Mahādevī, an idea that in many ways captures her essential nature, is *śakti. Śakti* means “power”; in Hindu philosophy and theology *śakti* is understood to be the active dimension of the godhead, the divine power that underlies the godhead’s ability to create the world and to display itself.3 Within the totality of the godhead, *śakti* is the complementary pole of the divine tendency toward quiescence and stillness. It is quite common, furthermore, to identify *śakti* with a female being, a goddess, and to identify the other pole with her male consort. The two poles are usually understood to be interdependent and to have relatively equal status in terms of the divine economy.4



Silver mask of Devī. Sixteen or seventeenth century A.D. Madanjeet Singh, *Himalayan Art* \(London: MacMillan, 1968\), p. 143.

Texts or contexts exalting the Mahādevī, however, usually affirm *śakti* to be a power, or *the* power, underlying ultimate reality, or to be ultimate reality itself. Instead of being understood as one of two poles or as one dimension of a bipolar conception of the divine, *śakti* as it applies to the Mahādevī is often identified with the essence of reality. If the Mahādevī as *śakti* is related to another dimension of the divine in the form of a male deity, he will tend to play a subservient role in relation to her.5 In focusing on the centrality of *śakti* as constituting the essence of the divine, texts usually describe the Mahādevī as a powerful, active, dynamic being who creates, pervades, governs, and protects the universe. As *śakti,* she is not aloof from the world but attentive to the cosmic rhythms and the needs of her devotees.

In a similar vein the Mahādevī is often identified with *prakṛti* and *māyā.* Indeed, two of her most common epithets are Mulaprakrti \(she who is primordial matter\) and Mahamaya \(she who is great *māyā\).* These ideas have negative connotations in certain schools of Hindu philosophy. Sāṁkhya philosphy and yogic spiritual techniques describe *prakṛti* as the web of matter in which one’s spiritual essence, *puruṣa* \(literally, the male\), is enmeshed. Yogic exercise aims at reversing the spontaneous tendencies of *prakṛti* to reproduce and specify itself. In the quest for liberation *prakṛti* represents that from which one seeks freedom. Similarly, most schools of Hindu philosophy identify *māyā* with that which prevents one from seeing things as they really are. *Māyā* is the process of superimposition by which one projects one’s own ignorance on the world and thus obscures ultimate truth. To wake up to the truth of things necessarily involves counteracting or overcoming *māyā,* which is grounded in ignorance and self-infatuation. Liberation in Hindu philosophy means to a great extent the transcendence of embodied, finite, phenomenal existence. And *māyā* is often equated precisely with finite, phenomenal existence.6 To be in the phenomenal world, to be an individual creature, is to live enveloped in *māyā.*

When the Mahādevī is associated with *prakṛti* or *māyā,* certain negative overtones sometimes persist. As *prakṛti* or *māyā* she is sometimes referred to as the great power that preoccupies individuals with phenomenal existence or as the cosmic force that impels even the gods to unconsciousness and sleep.7 But the overall result of the Mahādevī’s identification with *prakṛti* and *māyā* is to infuse both ideas with positive dimensions. As *prakṛti* or *māyā,* the Devi is identified with existence itself, or with that which underlies all existent things. The emphasis is not on the binding aspects of matter or the created world but on the Devi as the ground of all things. Because it is she who pervades the material world as *prakṛti* or *māyā,* the phenomenal world tends to take on positive qualities. Or perhaps we could say that a positive attitude toward the world, which is evident in much of popular Hinduism, is affirmed when the Devi is identified with *prakṛti* and *māyā.* The central theological point here is that the Mahādevī is the world, she is all this creation, she is one with her creatures and her creation. Although a person’s spiritual destiny ultimately may involve transcendence of the creation, the Devi’s identification with existence per se is clearly intended to be a positive philosophic assertion. She is life, and to the extent that life is cherished and revered, she is cherished and revered.

As *śakti, prakṛti,* and *māyā,* the Devī is portrayed as an overwhelming presence that overflows itself, spilling forth into the creation, suffusing the world with vitality, energy, and power. When the Devī is identified with these well-known philosophic ideas, then, a positive point is being made: the Devī creates the world, she is the world,8 and she enlivens the world with creative power. As *śakti, prakṛti,* and *māyā,* she is not understood so much as binding creatures to finite existence as being the very source and vitality of creatures. She is the source of creatures—their mother—and as such her awesome, vital power is revered.

The idea of *brahman* is another central idea with which the Devī is associated. Ever since the time of the *Upaniṣads, brahman* has been the most commonly accepted term or designation for ultimate reality in Hinduism. In the *Upaniṣads,* and throughout the Hindu tradition, *brahman* is described in two ways: as *nirguṇa* \(having no qualities or beyond all qualities\) and *saguṇa* \(having qualities\). As *nirguṇa,* which is usually affirmed to be the superior way of thinking about *brahman,* ultimate reality transcends all qualities, categories, and limitations. As *nirguṇa, brahman* transcends all attempts to circumscribe it. It is beyond all name and form *\(nāma-rūpa\).* As the ground of all things, as the fundamental principal of existence, however, *brahman* is also spoken of as having qualities, indeed, as manifesting itself in a multiplicity of deities, universes, and beings. As *saguṇa, brahman* reveals itself especially as the various deities of the Hindu pantheon. The main philosophical point asserted in the idea of *saguṇa brahman* is that underlying all the different gods is a unifying essence, namely, *brahman.* Each individual deity is understood to be a partial manifestation of *brahman,* which ultimately is beyond all specifying attributes, functions, and qualities.

The idea of *brahman* serves well the attempts in many texts devoted to the Devī to affirm her supreme position in the Hindu pantheon. The idea of *brahman* makes two central philosophic points congenial to the theology of the Mahādevī: \(1\) she is ultimate reality itself, and \(2\) she is the source of all divine manifestations, male and female \(but especially female\). As *saguṇa brahman,* the Devi is portrayed as a great cosmic queen enthroned in the highest heaven, with a multitude of deities as the agents through which she governs the infinite universes. In her ultimate essence, however, some texts, despite their clear preference for the Devi’s feminine characteristics, assert in traditional fashion that she is beyond all qualities, beyond male and female.9
