+++
title = "02 MYTHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS AND FUNCTIONS"

+++

The central role the Devī plays in mythology is that of creator and queen of the cosmos. When she is portrayed in her own form \(*svabhāva*\), she is usually described as a beautiful young woman in regal attire surrounded by thousands of attendants and seated on a throne in the highest heaven.10 As cosmic queen she oversees or performs directly the three primary cosmic functions of creation, preservation, and destruction. The world is said to be destroyed when she blinks her eyes and to be recreated when she opens her eyes.11

Many Hindu mythological texts attribute the three cosmic functions to Brahmā \(creation\), Viṣṇu \(preservation\), and Śiva \(destruction\). While texts extolling the Devī often picture these three male deities in their familiar roles, it is made clear that the male gods only act according to the Devī’s will and at her command.12 Some myths make the point that the great male gods are entirely dependent on the Devī for their strength and power and that if she withdraws her power they are impotent and helpless.13 The *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇa* also makes it clear that the traditional heavenly abodes of these deities are far below and inferior to the Devī’s heaven. Indeed, the text asserts that there are innumerable Brahmās , Viṣṇus, and Śivas, whose tasks are to govern the innumerable universes that ceaselessly bubble forth from the inexhaustibly creative Devī \(3.4.14–67\). In the *Lalitā-sahasranāma* the Devī is called she from whose ten fingernails spring the ten forms of Viṣṇu \(Karānguli-nakhotpanna-nārāyana-dasākṛtiḥ, 80\). In the *Saundaryalaharī* the entire universe is formed from a tiny speck of dust from the Devī’s foot. Brahmā takes that speck and from it fashions worlds that Viṣṇu, in his form as the many-headed cosmic serpent, can barely support with his thousand heads \(verse 2\). In a particularly humbling scene for the male deities, the Devī is described in her heaven as seated upon a couch, its four legs consisting of the great male deities of the Hindu pantheon.14 The point is clear: the great male gods still have important roles to play, but ultimately they are the servants of the Devī and do her bidding. She has created them, indeed, she has created innumerable copies of each of them, and they act as her cosmic agents, overseeing the universes she has created.

Although the male deities are frequently portrayed as carrying out their traditional cosmological functions at the Devī’s command, she herself is also often pictured as taking an active role in the cosmic processes. She is ever attentive to the world, particularly to her devotees, and in various forms she acts to uphold cosmic order and protect her creatures. Although her concern is that of a mother for her children, hence a passionate and ever-watchful concern, her favorite role as protector and preserver of the cosmos is that of the warrior, a traditionally male role. Many of her epithets emphasize this aspect of her character. The *Lalitā-sahasranāma* calls her she who slays demons \(Rākṣasaghnī, 318\), she who grants boons to great warriors \(Mahāvīrendravaradā, 493\), ruler of armies \(Caturaṅgabaleśvarī, 691\), she who is worshiped by warriors \(Vīrārādhya, *777*\), and mother of warriors \(Vīramātā, 836\).

The Devī’s most famous mythological exploits usually involve the defeat of demons who have taken over the world and displaced the gods from their positons as rulers of the cosmos. The three episodes featuring the goddess Durgā are particularly popular in texts celebrating the Mahādevī, and she is identified with Durgā in various renditions of the tales. To a great extent Durgā is the Devī’s most common or favorite form, and Durgā’s exploits are the most commonly celebrated events in Devī mythology. From the point of view of Mahādevī theology the two are essentially the same deity. The account of Durgā’s defeat of Mahiṣa in the *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇa*, for example, explicitly states that the Devī, though *nirguṇa* in her ultimate essence, assumes for her pleasure a great variety of forms in order to maintain cosmic order and that her form as Durgā is simply one of those forms, though undoubtedly a very important one.15 As Durgā, the Mahādevī is typically described as a ferocious, invincible warrior who descends into the world from time to time to combat evil of various kinds, especially demons who have stolen the positions of the gods.

As Durgā, the Mahādevī is in many ways like the great god Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu is usually pictured as a cosmic king who oversees the stability of the world. When the world is threatened by demons, he descends in different forms to combat the danger. The Mahādevī is also said to assume forms appropriate to cosmic threats. Viṣṇu is traditionally said to have ten *avatāras*. In each universal cycle he takes ten different forms to combat ten different demons. The Mahādevī, too, is said to have ten forms, the Dasamahāvidyās \(the ten great scenes or insights\). These ten forms include several well-known Hindu goddesses, and like the Vaiṣṇavite idea of *avatāras* the ten forms of the Devī effectively bring together distinct strands under a unifying great deity.16 From the point of view of Devī theology and cosmology the Hindu goddesses are varying manifestations of the Devī’s activity on behalf of the world. Durgā, Lakṣmī, Pārvatī, and other goddesses are all understood to be parts of a transcendent divine economy that is governed by the the Devī in her own form \(*svabhāva*\) or in her aspect as *brahman*. This economy with a few important exceptions, is oriented toward upholding and protecting the world.

The Devī, like Viṣṇu, also plays the role of protector and preserver in less grand, cosmic ways by making periodic and dramatic appearances on behalf of her individual devotees. In this role she plays the savior. Her devotees Samādhi and Suratha propitiate her in the closing scene of the *Devī-māhātmya*. She appears before them and gracjously grants their desires \(13.7–16\). In the *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇa* when her devotee Sudarśana is surrounded by his enemies and prays to her for help, she appears as a great warrior riding on her lion and quickly routs them \(3.23.18–41\). She appears to aid Rāma when he prays to her for help in defeating Rāvaṇa. She enpowers him to build a bridge from India to Laṅka and announces that she will cause him to defeat Rāvaṇa \(3.30.43–61\). In the *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇa’s* account of the well-known story of Hariścandra, who is reduced to poverty and the pitiable status of an outcaste, the Devī answers Hariścandra’s prayer by appearing and restoring him to his former state and reviving his child from the dead \(7.27.1–7\). The Mahādevī, then, though typically pictured as a distant, awesome figure who sits in majesty on a heavenly throne surrounded by divine attendants, is responsive to the pleas of her individual devotees and is quick to come to their aid in times of distress. She is understood to be an approachable, motherly figure who is never deaf to the cries of her children.
