+++
title = "01 Classical Study and Ethnography"

+++
Although possession as a religious and sociocultural phenomenon in ancient and classical India has been understudied, in fact rarely mentioned in the secondary literature (to a great extent because it has been regarded as absent in the primary literature),1 the opposite is the case for modern India, for which studies of possession abound. Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that possession is one of the most studied topics in anthropology and is beginning to find its way into the academic study of religion.2 Its attractiveness as a subject of study is often due to its exotic character (which is to say its spiritual distance from academe), its evident irrational Otherness, and its frequent presence in ritual. Caroline Humphrey and James Laidlaw, who have studied possession and exorcism among largely educated middle-class people at the Padampura Jain temple near Jaipur, assert, “Ethnographers have displayed an almost puzzle-solving pleasure in ‘decoding’ rituals: the more bizarre and serpentine the better. Behind this lies the idea that rituals contain hidden messages about the societies in which they are performed.”3 This, they believe, is the consuming passion of anthropologists; yet they see the scholar’s analysis of ritual (especially that in which possession is contextualized) as usually neglecting the participant’s view. This emic viewpoint is something I attempt to engage in this volume, as a parallel discourse to the etic viewpoints that constitute and regulate contemporary academics (though one may argue that the practice of an etic discourse in thinking about the Other is simultaneously the practice of an emic discourse within the tribe of scholars).4 Conferring at least limited credibility to emic viewpoints is, in my experience of contemporary scholarship (in opposition to Humphrey and Laidlaw’s observation), finding an increasingly prominent place in more recent studies of possession. Furthermore, in defense of those of us who study possession (including Humphrey and Laidlaw), it must be said that public performance of possession is nearly always thrilling and exotic for those who are enculturated. Thus anthropologists and other observers and researchers must not be faulted too severely for yielding to that same odd attractiveness, for succumbing to the spell of possession.5

In order to comprehend possession as presented in Sanskrit texts, it is important to understand the use of the English word and its background in Western thought, especially in anthropological analysis. However, it is neither possible nor desirable to provide a full accounting of the history of experiential states identified as “possession.” Nevertheless, a summary, particularly of possession reports in the Indian ethnographic literature, will prove helpful.6 Nevertheless, I do not intend to write an account of possession in Sanskrit texts according to any particular anthropological paradigm. I am not scrutinizing a broad range of Sanskrit and other classical Indian texts in order to historically validate any single anthropological model or with the specific intention of applying any of them exclusively or strictly to the evidence for possession derived from these texts. But the insights on possession gained by anthropologists and other ethnographers will be useful in evaluating the evidence adduced here—and I shall not hesitate to call on these insights when necessary or convenient.

In this section (Chapters 2–4) I first look at definitions of possession found in anthropological literature, especially in the work of scholars of South Asia. Then I examine a number of intellectual perspectives in which anthropologists and others situate possession. After considering these, I attempt a broad characterization of possession in South Asia according to the anthropological literature (Chapter 2). With this in mind, I consider, as an interlude, the distinction between deity or spirit possession in South Asia and trance channeling in contemporary America (Chapter 3). Then, I enter into a lengthy discussion of the vocabulary and general diction of possession and allied forms of spirit-mediumship in several South Asian languages and linguistic and cultural areas that have been the subject of studies of possession (Chapter 4). I conclude the chapter with a reflection on the relationship between “folk possession” and “classical possession.”
