+++
title = "05 Possession as a Form of Social Control"

+++
Possession is often interpreted as an expression of social control, or at least its attempt, a category that includes political power. Within this broad category of interpretation are almost innumerable variations that have been much pursued by anthropologists in the past several decades. Although control is exercised both actively and passively through political enforcement and cultural ideology, these interpretations have emphasized the active or performative aspects of possession and their roles within implicit psychological, social, and political contexts. This political influence in South Asia, however, is hardly felt because, despite the widespread practice of possession, it has not gained sufficiently broad formal recognition to influence religious or political bodies, as it has, for example, in certain places in Africa where possession argues much more visibly a politics of identity based on a sense of colonialist victimization,105 or in Tibet where the Nechung oracle has had a history of influencing the politics of the Dalai Lamas.106

Interpretations of possession as a product of or reaction to various modes of social control or oppression are usually aspects of broader interpretations that strive to locate more specifically and define more broadly the psychological and sociological dimensions of possession.107 At worst, these broad interpretations reduce possession to rituals of compensation or scripted cultural performance; at best, practice or performance theory, structuralism, and other innovative interpretative frameworks are invoked in conjunction with a sensitive hearing of other people’s ontologies and a solid understanding of the literary or folk-cultural backgrounds of the subjects under study.108 Claus’s comment—“The phenomenon of spirit possession—or rather a tradition of spirit possession—can provide a symbolic medium through which the individual (or group) re-adjusts himself to an appropriate [moral] order”109—provides a thicker accounting than many interpretations. This is because it views possession as a more or less normative and legitimated activity that helps sustain a balance between the possessed (who may or may not be the dispossessed) and the unpossessed. Viewed from this perspective, possession is an integral part of a self-regulating system of social control. It is not merely a one-sided or desperate compensatory response to oppression, nor is it a veiled or exclusive mode of cultural communication, the role of which is to socially or politically strengthen or empower the individual or group.

One of the more impressive and sophisticated studies of South Asian possession is Hancock’s explication of the social dimensions of oracular and ecstatic possession among middle-class Smārta brahman women in Madras. She claims, with Claus, that possession is an aspect of the socially self-regulating, yet ambiguous, mechanism of bhakti within a domestic setting, in which compliance with patriarchal norms is assured through retaining their “patriarchally derived identities as wives and mothers” while also manifesting a resistance to these norms “through their radical appropriation of authority through the avenues of possession and mediumship.”110 In a statement that can as well be true of possession in general, Hancock argues that bhakti “cannot be treated merely as a compensatory safety valve or an interstitial or liminal interlude in an otherwise normatively ordered social existence. Bhakti, especially as pursued by cumaṅkalis [Tamil, Skt. sumaṅgali (fortunate woman)], may be an agency for change in domestic life, whether the bhakta is perceived as succeeding or failing in her efforts.”111 It is this sort of observation that should be valued as a safety valve on the exclusivity of certain psychoanalytic or sociological conclusions about possession.

Although most cases of possession as āveśa or samāveśa attested in Sanskrit and other classical literature are manifestly empowering in a religious sense, I hesitate to overlap this empowerment with externally induced attempts at social control or engineering. While Sax’s observations (predominantly in men) of possession in present-day Garhwal—as a medium for the contestation of prestige through which social control is gained—constitute strong evidence for this interpretation (and this is replicated often enough in the ethnographic literature),112 I am not persuaded that possession as attested in Sanskrit texts is guided by this sort of quest, at least not in all cases. Primarily this is because much of the possession found in these texts is nonritual or at least may be epiphenomenal rather than primary (as in certain tantric texts examined below). Regardless of whether the texts accurately reflect possession outside the texts, in the present project we must evaluate the evidence at hand, which means textual, and only then attempt to infer sociological realities behind the texts. Unfortunately, very few studies have focused on nonceremonial possession (indeed, many scholars would hold that this very notion is mistaken)—and this requires us to go beyond the familiar theories in assessing “Sanskritic” possession. In other words, the evidence from classical texts does not ordain that I base my study on ethnographies from the past hundred years or that I necessarily regard these accounts as normative, as filling the lacunae that are a natural aspect of texts that do not aim at thick description. Rather, it seems, the vast number of texts that speak of possession directly or refer to its social context fragmentarily or obliquely provide evidence for other interpretations or for locating a home for this and other more or less singular and isolated interpretations of possession within other cultural and theoretical explanations, not all of them necessarily contemporary Western models. Part of the reason I feel uncertain about this or any other singular interpretation is the lack of evidence: Quite simply, Indology cannot easily, if at all, locate the political background to first millennium B.C.E. or C.E. events with the precision and depth of events that Caldwell, Claus, Erndl, Hancock, Sax, and others present through the disciplined practice of ethnography.

That said, it is necessary to emphasize that possession is, in virtually all cases including those described in ancient and classical literature, an act of social subversion as well as an act of social confirmation, at least within a small but informed circle, regardless of the visible or conditioned structures of oppression surrounding it. Possession subverts consensual views of consciousness, the nature of the individual, and the orderliness of social and political order. Possession, even when it is nonritual (as in the case of disease-producing possession), behaves like ritual in that it is itself a structure of resistance, a rift in the psychological, social, and political fabric of society. However, in most cases (even in disease-producing possession) it is a contained rift: It is not ultimately counter-hegemonic, as Claus has noted. Thus possession becomes a satisfying, sometimes even a necessary, dissociative experience that ends up presenting very little threat to prevailing orders. It becomes a form of “controlled chaos,” to invoke Heesterman’s depiction of vedic ritual. And, like the latter, what is controlled is (usually) the danger, the violence, the utter alienness, of possession.113 Just as vedic sacrifice cannot be performed outside a sanctified ritual arena, thus limiting its extension into the social and political arenas, possession cannot be manifested outside its own orbit; it is self-contained, limited by the boundaries of the body. Although this observation may seem obvious and tautological, what I mean here is that as a dissociative experience it is segregated from consensual, normatively configured, states of consciousness and communication. As a site of resistance, possession has a limited domain, and when performed it tends to “lapse back into the social order,” as Dirks notes of public ritual.114 Just as both the individual and the social order are reckoned to be permeable and fluid as a result of possession, possession is ultimately circumscribed, penetrated, and permeated by the social and political orders. That this is much more evident in anthropological studies than in the classical South Asian literary record introduces a question that we can attempt to answer only at the end of our study: To what extent can we equate possession as discourse with possession as event? Or, more precisely, to what extent does possession as a discursive event represent possession as a psychophysical enactment?

Because of the prevalence of interpretations that seek to locate (and limit) possession as a product of social and psychological forces, I offer, early in my account, some tentative, if synthetic, conclusions on these issues. Many studies have shown that the splitting of the personality into discrete personae—public and private, outer and inner, authorized and unauthorized, lawful and illicit—is a characteristic of authoritarian societies. This fragmentation, and the consequent struggle to unify the self, or at least to publicly depict a unified self, may be extended to more restricted domains of tyranny: within the family, particularly women under patriarchal oppression; within the school or other educational systems characterized by consensual dominance and inferiority; within prisons or other more modified precincts of legal systems; and within hospitals and other health-care environments in which an afflicted individual becomes psychologically exposed, uncertain, and disadvantaged. In other words, the personality fragments—and becomes habituated to such fragmentation—in encounters of conditioned inequality. Among the time-honored methods of contending with this loss is full or partial dissociation. As we have seen, among the defining features of dissociation is increased intensity of mood, which complements increased objectival focus. This arises as extraneous or impractical aspects of the personality drop away as part of a coping mechanism. Dissociation thus becomes a response to particular varieties of stimuli. However, while these stimuli may not fit into cultural categories sanctioned hierarchically, they may not be destructive and may not necessarily be oppressive in the classical sense. They may simply fall outside the system. But, good, bad, or neutral in any cultural system, they may be said to oppress the openness of the personality by shutting down certain areas of it, areas that are, at least temporarily, deemed inconvenient, unnecessary, and distracting. The difference, then, between dissociation and any ordinary shift in mood or focus is one of intensity and cultural recognition and accountability.

Examples might be dissociation derived from the inspiration of religious or spiritual experience, from an encounter with novelty or from anything that might suddenly push the mind into new and captivating realms of thought. Thus a poor woman suffering patriarchal oppression in an Indian or Nepali village might develop the ability to sequester her mind from the drab familiarity of her world by entering into an intimate and coveted relationship with a deity (or the idea of a deity), then become so engrossed in it that she acts out, manifests, and finally “becomes” the deity. This is possession, regardless of the “reality” of the deity. Similarly, a man, prosperous and seemingly in control, might covet a deep relationship with a deity or other ethereal being (or with the constructed idea of the deity or being) and psychophysically act out the theorized behavior of that being: This may well be surprising and unexpected to the man. Again, this is possession, regardless of the “reality” of the deity or ethereal being. What is cultivated is a heightened awareness and spontaneity that is exciting and attractive to both performer and audience. This increased focus and spontaneity is highly valued as an enhanced level of awareness. What turns this into āveśa in popular culture from the Ṛgveda to the present—or, according to certain Tantras, samāveśa—is that it is a willed and invited, rather than an involuntary, state. Of course, there may be involuntary possession, and this is dealt with in due course.
