+++
title = "08 Śakti, the Localization of Divinity, and the Possessed"

+++
We must now discuss some specifications of possession in South Asia, including, first, the possibility of possession as a gendered phenomenon. In South Asia, as elsewhere, more women than men appear to experience possession. Important to understanding why this is the case, and perhaps always has been, is an evaluation of the constitution of personhood and sacred space in South Asia, for these are intimately linked in the physical and metaphysical complex of South Asian women’s possession. It is also necessary to discuss possession as performance, as this is also linked with the constitution of the person and relational space.

Schoembucher notes that the earliest European notice of possession was in 1713 by Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg, the Danish missionary who lived on the Malabar coast, while the first serious anthropological study was by C. G. Seligmann and Brenda Seligmann, who wrote an account of spirit mediumship among the Veddas of Ceylon in 1911. These and most subsequent studies have remarked on the preponderance of women in possession.152 One reason often attributed is psychosocial: Possession is a refuge and an empowerment for the oppressed and marginalized woman in a patriarchal society. In this sense, possession is a ritually protected means of enabling a woman to interact from a position of authority and status. Many studies of South Asian possession bear this out, though not all are in agreement about how this occurs.153

In fact, the classical feminist model explicates the dynamics of oppression and empowerment and, in possession studies, investigates notions of agency. The most recent general study of this is by Mary Keller, who investigates the interrelationships between women’s bodies, power, and possession. Her principal observations led her to theorize an “instrumental agency,” in which “possessed bodies share the same paradoxical agency in that the body is not speaking, it is spoken through; the body is not hammering, it is being used to hammer; the body is not mounting, it is being mounted.”154 This will come as no surprise to those who study possession in South Asia; the evidence presented in Chapter 4 reveals that language after language in South Asia has terms for riding, mounting, and so on that are characteristic of possession, preponderantly women’s possession. Does this then occlude or nullify any power in the form of cultural rebalancing that women might gain from possession, by shifting the power to a possessing spirit or deity and away from the woman herself as an autonomous agent? My sense is that it does not. Primarily, I believe, this is because the question does not quite work in the context of South Asia. First, much of this power is ritualized,155 which tends to reinforce cultural conservatism, as both the textual and ethnographic evidence reveals. Most women’s possession practice tends to maintain, rather than threaten, the power distribution between men and women by functioning within orbits of culturally sanctioned ritual control. The release of the energies of women’s oppression into possession states does little in the end to rectify the power imbalance between the sexes in the “traditional” cultures of South Asia. However, the reasons for this have less to do with the shifting of power to a spirit or deity or, more broadly, to possession as an ineffective mode for asserting women’s power than with a millennia-old acceptance of possession as, to a great extent, a women’s cultural or religious practice. Notions of agency, including Keller’s of an instrumental agent that functions outside or in opposition to the realm of “selfhood,” simply have not arisen in South Asia, where an autonomous self was rarely regarded as normative, or even particularly sought after, beyond the thin veneer of certain forms of vedāntic theory and practice. The normative self was understood as permeable, hence the distinction was rarely drawn between an instrumental agent and an autonomous self. In this sense, the power women derived from possession was real, and constantly corrective, because they functioned autonomously and powerfully as instrumental agents.

A reason closely embedded in the woman’s marginalization in South Asian culture that is sometimes given for the preponderance of women’s possession is their relatively lower level of education, especially in rural towns and villages, which, some say, contributes to their greater ability to experience “irrational” states.156 Although it is true that positivistic education contributes to the growth of “reason” and a concomitant devaluation of states that run counter to that, the evidence presented in Chapter 3 and verified elsewhere in the world demonstrates that possession states can occur, even abundantly, in literate and educated societies.157 To give this as a reason for possession is to harbor biases, which should have been put to rest by now, against the mental and psychic capacities of the “Other” and to misunderstand the possibilities of our own positivistic education and the challenges it confronts in an ever-changing culture.

The notion that possession is a long-established aspect of “women’s religion,” as opposed to the supposedly more intellectualized and ritually formalized “religion” of men, receives a boost from Margaret Trawick, who contributes to this understanding in her observation that women in South India who are possessed by the goddess Māriyammaṉ are the feminine counterparts to the masculine practitioners of the siddha tradition of Śaiva Siddhānta.158 To whatever extent this may be the case, what appears certain is that women are consistently depicted locally as embodying an inherent power, a pure but malleable active energy that is both dangerous and spiritually potent, called śakti or, in Tamil, aṇaṅku.159 It is this, I might speculate, that is the conductor of women’s permeability or penetrability or, more strongly, that it is a uniquely gendered substance that cultivates women’s power and (among other things) contributes to the capacity for possession. This characterization, especially the assertion of inherence, is largely a male cultural construct, in which śakti (Ta. cakti) or, perhaps less, aṇaṅku, because of its greater ambiguity or multivalence, is believed to derive from the woman’s awesome and incomprehensible menstrual and child-bearing capacities, from her mysterious ability to manifest blood and babies.160 In spite of the culturally conceived purity of the energy that lies behind the phenomenon of manifestation or transformation, whether it is of babies, deities, or spirits, the obverse is equally regarded: a latent impurity that is an aspect of a more delicate female constitution. At any time this can burst forth into dangerous, “negative,” possession, into illness and madness—a topic examined in detail in Chapter 12.

The characterization of śakti as an inherent female power, inherent because it is identified as the essence and energy of the goddess, is noted in many anthropological reports. This śakti may be intensified in any individual through possession, typically goddess possession, which is itself typically an intensified form of bhakti. However, manifestation of śakti, even regularly, neither elevates a woman from poverty nor confers on her equal status in a patriarchal universe, in spite of its temporary empowerment; wealth and status operate independently of śakti or possession. In fact, the situation is quite the opposite: Although exceptionally a person who gains a reputation for oracular possession may benefit financially through developing a consultative practice,161 usually possession and other manifestations of śakti confirm the socioeconomic order as they provide a separate identity comprehensible from within the woman’s world. Hancock notes, based on fieldwork with middle-class Smārta brahman women from Madras who experienced possession of the goddess Karumāriyammaṉ, “Women’s devotionalism, including spirit possession, often involved efforts to renegotiate domestic relations of authority while still retaining their patriarchally derived identities as wives and mothers.”162 Somewhat at odds with Hancock’s sociological observation, Margaret Egnor (Trawick) reports on a life history of a woman regularly possessed by the goddess Māriyammaṉ in Tamilnadu: “Mediums for the goddess are expected to be poor, low caste individuals.… The poverty and low status that Sarasvati endures are considered necessary conditions for possession by the goddess.”163 Nevertheless, Egnor, in agreement with Hancock, adds, “if women have more śakti than men, this is (at least in part) because women stand in the position of servants with respect to men.”164 Thus neither possession nor the śakti on which it both rides and creates upsets the social order. Indeed, śakti legitimates the suffering implicit in woman’s subordination, and it is this, Egnor concludes, that creates “an essential unbreakable unity among females themselves.”165

The manifestation of śakti is therefore self-empowering and at least temporarily subverting in that it confirms and liberates the woman’s suffering and status so that it may be used to her advantage. Yet that universe of empowered suffering is (in general) ritually circumscribed, hence does not confer on her the social or political power to threaten the patriarchal order, at least not in the long term. The male Śiva, the archetypal śaktimān, controls his consort Pārvatī, the śakti. Woman, characterized as śakti, is, in possession, in fact revealed as śaktimati, śakti as controller, in her incarnation as Durgā, in which she controls the male god. This is her act of subversion. Durgā is Mahiṣāsuramardinī, the “slayer of the buffalo demon,” as she mounts a tiger and destroys ignorance incarnated as a man deformed. It is śakti as śaktimatī that is subversive and is therefore feared and overpowered by men. But in possession, especially oracular, the woman—here the goddess (most possessing deities are female)—manifests power that confronts men directly. Erndl has shown that village women in Panjab become Śerāṅvālī, “she who rides the lion,” by becoming possessed, by being “ridden” by the goddess.166 It is this powerful woman who tames the oppressive man. The reversal is empowering to the woman and her community, even if it cannot extend to other sociocultural areas. In other words, women in possession opt out of the dominant culture and create their own path, reversing the socially inscribed hierarchy provisionally and briefly, demonstrating to themselves, at least, its vulnerability and shallowness.167

This function of possession is not unlike that of certain genres of women’s songs, which Gloria Raheja and Ann Gold show empower women while they critique the structure of the dominant male culture, without, however, materially altering it.168 Both women’s possession and women’s songs follow the inherited cultural and religious paradigm in India in which women’s participation and empowerment rarely lead to social dominance. For example, in the Vedic New and Full Moon sacrifice (darśapūrṇamāsa), the wife of the sacrificer undergoes a regular ritual initiation, as both Stephanie Jamison and I have pointed out.169 According to the Vedic Brāhmaṇa texts, this empowers the woman to influence the ritual, hence the workings of the cosmos, in uniquely gendered ways, while not substantially affecting the patriarchal social order.

The nature of śakti as a factor in possession must be contrasted with the classical Tamil concept of aṇaṅku, a term that does not appear in ethnographies, but is nonetheless related to śakti and its modern deployment. Indeed, it is entirely possible that the concept of aṇaṅku, at least certain aspects of it, influenced the discourses of śakti and possession in Sanskrit. The term aṇaṅku was brought to general Indological notice by George Hart in his 1975 book, The Poems of Ancient Tamil. Hart gives this term the broad meaning of “sacred power.” However, upon review of the usages of aṇaṅku in early Tamil texts Kamil Zvelebil amends it to a “fear-provoking divine or demoniac force … [a] hieratic, sacred power, which could be dangerous but not always malevolent.”170 Zvelebil continues:

The functioning of aṇaṅku in human recipients represents often the true power of possession which caused particularly in women a kind of “sickness” (nōy) which had to be dealt with, controlled, removed. However, apart from this possession by aṇaṅku which must have been regarded as dangerous and unwanted, the same sacred force emanating from Murugan caused obviously a sacred possession, a hieratic trance which was welcomed and very probably self-induced.171

Thus aṇaṅku is the substantial and immanent means through which divinity, or any other power, is localized, whether it occurs in objects, places, or persons.172

The phenomenon of “localization” was explicated by David Shulman, who demonstrated that each Tamil shrine “sees itself as the only center of the universe, the one spot that is directly linked to heaven and the nether world.”173 This extensiveness and localization of divinity, though not a concept actively enunciated in the early Tamil texts, was an assumed part of south Indian religion and much more of a force in central and north India than Shulman recognized.174 Shulman’s statement is, after all, a strikingly succinct summary of shamanistic idealism, which has been shown to be distributed throughout the world. Although it is possible that the recognition in Tamil sthalapurāṇas of the multilocality of divinity influenced the acceptance of this notion elsewhere in the subcontinent, it is also possible that the notion was at least partially derived from vedic sources, which are also often quite specific about the localization of divinity. Nevertheless, the acceptance of the multilocality of divinity must surely have contributed to the notion that the divine, or any other less benign force, could penetrate and divinize any receptive individual. In this way, the individual—the person in the form of the body—became a sacred site, confirming the Toda conception of sacred space noted by Murray Emeneau in 1938: “the ‘sacred place’ and the ‘god’ are the same thing.”175 It is remarkable that this notion of the coextensiveness of divinity and place is preserved among the Toda, a nonliterate tribal group that speaks a Dravidian dialect, almost two millennia after the composition of the early Tamil literature. The assumption of localization, immanence, and transportability of divinity, possibly a dispersed relic of early Tamil religious thought, thus became a background metaphysic for the widespread phenomenon of possession in South Asia.176

It is also entirely possible that this phenomenon of localization of divinity was more applicable to women’s lives than to men’s. Most of the religiosity that survives in early Sanskrit literature is men’s religion. Men were the priests, the official mediators between the gods and the rest of the human species; they were largely responsible for the construction of temples, as inscriptions of all ages testify; they constituted the vast majority of renunciates; they were the majority of teachers and yogins. However, it is unreasonable to assume that, in such a culture, women did not also assert the sacredness of their domain, nor is it reasonable to assume that they would cede full control of that sacredness. If I may be permitted to project backward from the modern ethnographies, I would speculate that, for a millennium or two at least, possession has had a presence in women’s religion. Indeed, evidence from the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, discussed in Chapter 5, permits this. It was an ideal strategy for localizing divinity and the social and religious power incumbent in that divinity, both of which were otherwise in the dominion of more socially and economically privileged men.

This fluidity of role evident in the woman’s assumption of śakti (or aṇaṅku) in possession brings up one of the major issues involved in thinking about possession, one to which Boddy refers in her definition: that possession exposes the fluid and permeable nature of personal identity. I say more about this below, but here I might pose a few of the questions that require attention later on: Is the individual still an individual when possessed? Is possession a state in which both the individual and the ethereal possession agent (deity or spirit) are fully attributed? If so, is the fabric of the individual then destroyed? Is it a mistake to assume an autonomous individuality in the first place?

It is useful here to review Marriott’s notion of “substance-code.” This term indicates a diversity abiding within, and even constituting, a unity or inseparability, a common locus of “codes,” for example, puruṣa, norm, mind, and spirit, and their “substance” counterparts, prakṛti, behavior, body, and matter, respectively. Particles of substance codes mutate and recombine with particles from others, thus manifesting new ones. Not only is this thesis closely related to anthropological theories of the self as a system of symbols and social meanings that is best articulated semiotically,177 but it can be viewed as a restatement of the brahmanical bandhutā (linkage) that will be discussed below. How is it that Viṣṇu is the sacrifice or dawn the head of the horse? “Such ancient and widely held Indian assumptions,” says Marriott, “if abstractly stated, seem compatible with the theories of modern natural scientists, although they conflict with common Western popular beliefs in standard, stable entities and in the normally impermeable, autonomous person.”178 Marriott recognizes that:

persons—single actors—are not thought in South Asia to be “individual,” that is, indivisible, bounded units, as they are in much of Western social and psychological theory as well as in common sense. Instead, it appears that persons are generally thought by South Asians to be “dividual” or divisible. To exist, dividual persons absorb heterogeneous material influences. They also must give out from themselves particles of their own coded substances—essences, residues, or other active influences—that may then reproduce in others something of the nature of the persons in whom they have originated. Persons engage in transfer of bodily substance-codes through parentage, through marriage, and through other kinds of interpersonal contacts.179

Although Marriott has applied this concept to caste transactions, the question “How does possession work?” can be answered in part through application of this concept. Dividual persons, entities, or even concepts transfer parts or essences of themselves, in whole or in part, willfully or by force, to other dividual persons, entities, or concepts. A case of transfer of substance-code in the anthropological record occurs in Obeyesekere’s study of the Pattini cult, in which transfer of the goddess’s essence (Simhala diṣṭi; Skt. dṛṣṭi; glance) is a state called ākarṣaṇa, translated by Obeyesekere as “magnetism,”180 distinguished locally from possession, āveśa or āruḍha (mounted).181 The use of Sanskrit terms here is significant, because this distinction is not found in Sanskrit texts, where ākarṣtṇa, (attraction) is one of the “six acts” (ṣaṭ karmāṇi) of left-handed Tantra.182 At any rate, the point is that ākarṣṇa, in Obeyesekere’s sense, becomes, in Marriott’s, a physiological substance that is transacted during ritual action. The goal of this transaction is to integrate the dividual individual’s activated substance-code with a similar, though more powerful, substance of the divinity. In so doing, rather as a byproduct, incompatible or negatively charged substances are surmounted or removed.

Nabokov critiques Marriott’s view by stating that, in her experience, Tamil ritual does not serve an integrative or reintegrative function, but fragments the participants “to the point of splitting them apart.”183 This is a serious criticism, in spite of Nabokov’s (correct) contention that her “research seems to rather corroborate Marriott and Inden’s ‘dividual’ model of the Hindu person.”184 Her view is that the ritual she observed, which had a major component of possession by deceased relatives, left the individual, in the end, in a state in which she (usually) was forced to dis-integrate psychologically in order to reproduce her received roles and patterns within the dominant culture of oppression. Without the benefit of the thick description that modern ethnography offers, it will become clear that possession in classical Indian literature supports Marriott’s views more readily than Nabokov’s.
