+++
title = "11 NOTES"

+++
1. A recent exception is Padoux 1999.
2. Boddy 1994 cites 221 anthropological and ethnographic studies of possession, and this is far from complete as she cites only English-language sources.
3. Humphrey and Laidlaw 1994:261. The authors add, with respect to the notion that the purpose of ritual is cultural communication: “Our theory suggests that this is a mistake” (ibid.).
4. I am grateful to Scott Schnell, an anthropologist, for this observation.
5. I return to this theme periodically. See also Kapferer 1997:83, on the attraction to the anthropologist of sorcery in general. For a very different reaction, see Nabokov (2000), who admits to being so intrigued by possession and a séance that she witnessed one night at the beginning of her fieldwork in Tamilnadu that she spent the remainder of her research year attempting to understand what she had seen (pp. 3–4). By the end of the year, however, she claims to have “acquired none of the fascination that anthropologists working on possession sometimes develop for states of trance” (pp. 179–80). Her illuminating book provides the reasons for this; indeed, the reasons are embedded in the title, Religion Against the Self.
6. See the work of Biardeau, including her 1989a primer on Hinduism; also Knipe 1991 and Fuller 1992 for introducing anthropological material into introductory books on Hinduism. Fuller presents an especially good summary of deity and spirit possession in popular religion (1992:231–236).
7. Boddy 1994:407.
8. Bourguignon 1976:31.
9. Ibid.:7–8. Bourguignon is strongly critiqued in Levy et al. 1996:17ff.
10. Bourguignon 1976:1.
11. Becker 1993:11.
12. Rouget’s definition of possession as a “trance of identification” is too broad and too vague to serve as a starting point, though, as seen in discussions of bhakti, in South Asia identification with a deity is often regarded as a variety of possession; cf. Rouget 1985:25–28, 325.
13. Jilek 1971:214.
14. E. Turner 1992a, 1992b, 1993; and Halperin’s (1996) important critique of Turner. I would include Humphrey and Laidlaw in this group except that possession is not their primary object of study.
15. Claus 1984:61.
16. Halperin 1996:31.
17. Ferris 1999:35. This might be juxtaposed with a quotation from Aldous Huxley:
    No man, however civilized, can listen for very long to African drumming, or Indian chanting, or Welsh hymn singing, and retain intact his critical and self-conscious personality. It would be interesting to take a group of the most eminent philosophers from the best universities, shut them up in a hot room with Moroccan dervishes or Haitian Voodooists, and measure, with a stop-watch, the strength of their psychological resistance to the effects of rhythmic sound. Would the Logical Positivists be able to hold out longer than the Subjective Idealists? Would the Marxists prove tougher than the Thomists or the Vedantins? What a fascinating, what a fruitful field for experiment! Meanwhile, all we can safely predict is that, if exposed long enough to the tom-toms and singing, every one of our philosophers would end up by capering and howling with the savages. (1952:369)
    This is no doubt an extreme statement that might be contrasted with Nabokov’s opposing personal view cited in note 5. For an excellent anthropological self-disclosure, see Stoller and Olkes 1987.
18. Schoembucher 1993:242.
19. See Stoller 1998, for a discussion of several approaches: universalist (Horton, Sperber, Lévi-Strauss, Ernest Gellner), relativist (Tambiah, Geertz), and phenomenological (Husserl, Schutz). “Relativists complain that universalists are insensitive, eurocentric, or even racist. Universalists chide the relativists for their scientific naïveté and epistemological imprecisions” (p. 248), while phenomenologists tend to be too ahistorical. Stoller concludes that “the phenomenological approach might lead us to more embodied rationalities that are intellectually and personally transformative” (p. 240).
20. For an excellent account of the “hegemonic” Protestant interpretative ethos in studies of classical India, see Schopen 1991. For a reminder of just how thoroughly these ideas still dominate our thinking, see Tambiah 1990.
21. Humphrey and Laidlaw 1994:261. Elsewhere they write: “anthropologists engaged in symbolic analysis often singularly fail to provide realistic information about what people actually say about such symbols, no doubt because the actors so frequently reply something along the lines, ‘I know this means something, but I don’t know what it is.’ Anthropological interpretations have commonly covered up such unhelpful replies in order to produce a reading from their own deductions” (p. 180). And “we would claim that an across-the-board analysis, with no attention to the cognition of real participants, produces an occluded and ontologically unclear level of analysis” (p. 181).
22. Appadurai 1993:333–334.
23. Bell 1992, esp. ch. 4–6, reminds us of the dangers of positing general theories of ritual: all theorizing, she insists, must be deeply contextualized.
24. Dirks 1992:233.
25. Nabokov 2000:16.
26. Will 1991:9. Wade strongly discourages hypnosis: “Don’t even watch it” (p. 31). He refers to spiritualism as an “ancient monster” (p. 72) and states that, “possession results from submission to the suggestions of an evil spirit” (p. 41). It is not necessary for me to recount here the history of Orientalism or the extensive scholarship on it in the past thirty years.
27. Originally: Genealogie der malabarishen Götter. Aus eigenen schriften und briefen der heiden zusammengetragen und verfasst (Madras, 1867). English translation: Genealogy of the South-Indian Gods; a Manual of the Mythology and Religion of the People of Southern India, Including a Description of Popular Hinduism (Madras, 1869; New Delhi, 1984). A more exact translation of the title would be: Genealogy of the Malabar Gods, Compiled from My Own Writings and Letters of the Heathens. See Sweetman 2003:104-126, for an account of Ziegenbalg’s life and a number of translations from his work, some of which appear shockingly heavy-handed to today’s reader. See also Jeyeraj 2004 for a complete translation of Ziegenbalg’s original manuscript along with a thoughtful analysis.
28. Fountain 2000. See also Cuneo 2001, for an account of the rise in exorcism in the United States in the past several decades, which, he says, is due to the influence of popular culture, e.g., the film The Exorcist, increasing Protestant fundamentalism, and the acceptance of exorcism as an alternative to conventional psychotherapy for those who are wounded, addicted, or sexually abused. This fits with some of the observations of Lewis discussed below, as well as with my own observations in contemporary India (Chapter 12).
29. McClintock 1990:46.
30. I am not claiming here that there was an unbroken continuity between Ziegenbalg and McClintock or that the latter was typically “orientalist.” Nor do I intend here to equate Protestantism with orientalism. Indeed, most orientalists (in both senses of the word) were not Protestant missionaries.
31. Cf. Certeau 1984; Ginzburg 1989. The latter is an excellent historical example of this process of negotiating.
32. Catholic and Protestant churches had slightly different formal stances on the issue of possession. Nevertheless, they were alike enough with respect to what they encountered in South Asia to conflate them here without fear of undue essentializing.
33. Thomas 1977:569–588.
34. Ibid.:569. Thomas also explains that the spread of enlightenment rationalism in English Protestantism helped bring witchcraft persecutions to an end, notably with the repeal of the Witchcraft Act in 1736 (p. 535).
35. Ibid.:570.
36. Cf. Norton 2002.
37. Nevertheless, many Protestant denominations, including mainstream Methodists, speak of “being filled with the spirit.” Furthermore, Pentacostalists “speak in tongues,” while certain Catholic saints experienced stigmata, all resonant with different manifestations of āveśa.
38. Levy et al. 1996:15. With respect to the Pacific islands, they note that Christianity “radically altered the cultural framework for numinals, selectively overthrowing or demoting the gods, replacing a rich diversity of conceptualizations with an undifferentiated residual and negative category of ‘devils’ or ‘demons’” (pp. 24–25). Missionary attempts to impose this in India met with decidedly less success. For comments on the opposite effects of colonial Christianity and modernity on possession cults, see the articles on possession in Southeast Asia in Mageo and Howard 1996.
39. See Ram 1991:85–105, passim, for comments on possession and healing in a Christian community of Kanyakumari District in southern Kerala. The discourse, language, and actions are little different from those of Hindu possession, reflecting (at least in this case) little political involvement in religion by the ancient (Syrian) Christian Church in Kerala.
40. Cf. Claus 1984:60f; Lewis 1989:18ff.
41. Danforth 1989:60.
42. Masson 1976:615 (1999:238).
43. For example, Masson’s statement “I cannot help viewing asceticism … as a defense, not a freely chosen position” (196:620; 1999:243). Masson fails to recognize that the reasons for asceticism in India can be, and always have been, myriad and that freely chosen positions are probably never free of conditioning factors. Procrustean characterizations like this close off the possibility of truly engaging the Other.
44. Ervin et al. (1988) and Simons et al. (1988) take steps toward establishing formal research criteria: Simons et al. show that, in Thaipusam, a possession ritual performed in Southeast Asia, based on South Indian precedents, a training regimen is in general a prelude to the experience of possession; in other words, it is a learned behavior. While seeking to understand the mechanisms of trance physiology, the second study confirms the findings of the first one: that the physiological responses to possession are sharpened through repetition, which is to say through practice, a conclusion discussed further in Chapter 4. The conclusions of Ervin et al. are that muscle tone is increased, that except for the slow pulse the state resembles hypoglycemic shock and that the recovery period of a few minutes is characterized by headache, photophobia, and confusion. “Early in training,” they state, “trances are characterized by poorly organized motor hyperactivity and occasionally the display of intense emotion. With experience, the motor patterns become more coherently organized with few affective displays. In both cases, trances are accompanied by amnesia. This state is suggestive of other situations in which the limbic system dominates the behavioural program” (Ervin et al. 1988:277).
45. An excellent and sympathetic introduction to cross-cultural psychoanalysis, which outlines the theoretical assumptions behind psychotherapy, is Frank and Frank 1991, esp. ch. 5. They state, with respect to their method: “Practitioners of bio-medicine generally refuse to take seriously the evidence that healing can occur through procedures involving the paranormal or supernatural. In seeking to maintain objectivity, we shall try to navigate between the Scylla of scornful scepticism and the Charybdis of gullibility” (p. 88).
46. Castillo 1994a:2. Much of my discussion here is summarized from this excellent article.
47. See Lewis-Fernández 1998, for a critique of what was added to or deleted from the latest edition of the DSM (American Psychiatric Association 1994). Lewis-Fernández was a member of the subcommittee of the American Psychiatric Association that recommended these changes. He notes: “Very prevalent phenomenologies such as ‘possession trance syndromes,’ amok, ‘falling out’ and ataques de nervios, among several others, still did not have an appropriate nosological niche in the manual” (p. 388). He also notes, as do many others, “the inherent normalcy of most dissociative states” (ibid.), adding that specific diagnostic criteria that would enable the clinician to distinguish between normal and pathological dissociation was also lacking.
48. Crapanzano 1977:4.
49. Jonas (1965), a practicing psychoanalyst, links demonic possession with epileptoid phenomena: “In the past, many afflicted individuals thought they had been possessed by the devil or the holy ghost, and it is quite probable that many of the visions and voices described by mystics and prophets were not triggered by hysterical disassociations but epileptic equivalents” (p. 48, cited by Weiss 1977:160). Weiss’s Ph.D. dissertation, now being revised for publication, has analyzed Indian categories of unmāda, “insanity,” and exogenous disease-causing spirits in terms of Freudian categories of psychological pathology (pp. 112–186). Whatever might be said of Weiss’s work (and more is said at length in Chapter 12), it stands on firmer ground than some of the early “pseudo-psychiatric” studies he cites (as bad examples of the psychoanalytic trade), which grandly (and grandiosely) diagnose Indian culture at large, such as Berkeley-Hill 1921 (cf. Weiss 1977:135n5). For more grand theories, see Oesterreich 1930.
50. Significantly, the New York Times reported in 1999 that, “the Vatican again urged bishops and priests not to confuse psychological suffering and possession, and to seek medical help while at the same time offering spiritual consolation” (Tagliabue 1999:4).
51. Tambiah 1990:134–135.
52. Cf. Vallabhācārya, Antaḥkaraṇaprabodha, and commentaries.
53. Cf. Kakar 1982:53–88. Most of the clientele at the temples and facilities in Mehndipur are from first-generation literate families with strong memories of the lifeways of oral cultures (cf. the work of Luria, cited in Ong 1982).
54. Pakaslahti 1998:130.
55. Pakaslahti writes (personal communication, October 2001) that he disagrees with Kakar’s view that “possession phenomena in Balaji are manifestations of hysteria or hysteric personality. Such a view—not rare among Indian doctors—is a ‘pathologization’ of the native therapeutic processes and phenomena. It overlooks the cultural construction of possession in Balaji which provides a specific language, the forms and the method of spirit-possession-as-therapy.”
56. Lambek 1996:239.
57. Ibid.:238. Like most other researchers on possession, I find Lambek’s positions extreme. Morris states the case with greater subtlety: “For only in the wake of a submission to the fictions that mediums themselves inhabit can one ask what work forgetting performs and, thus, how mediumship works” (2000:125).
58. See Stephens’s 2003 book on the Christian clerical misogynistic preoccupation with stories of sex with demons in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries and their consequent crises regarding the reality of not just demons, but God as well. This account strengthens my own sense of the emic nature of Western scholarship in the work of Lambek and other anthropological witch hunters. They have, it seems, unwittingly taken up the mantle of their clerical forebears, assigning it a place under the rubric “hermeneutic of suspicion,” then superimposed it onto their anthropological subjects. This hermeneutic has no doubt advanced their (and our) scholarship, but sometimes the results are little different from what they were hundreds of years ago: a totalization of their own ontological worldview and a privileging of it over that of their subjects. This has emerged as part of the dominant and still very Christian scientific paradigm, something that most in the modern Western academy have failed to problematize.
59. Bourguignon 1976:10. Note her inclusion of dissociation as a subset of hysteria.
60. Littlewood 1996:4.
61. Ibid.:7.
62. Geertz 1983:59.
63. Littlewood 1996:7.
64. Cf. DSM-IV:487, #300.14. Dissociative Identity Disorder is defined as follows:

    A.The presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states (each with its own relatively enduring pattern of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the environment and self).
    B.At least two of these identities or personality states recurrently take control of the person’s behavior.
    C.Inability to recall important personal information that is too extensive to be explained by ordinary forgetfulness.
    D.The disturbance is not due to the direct psychological effects of substance (e.g., blackouts or chaotic behavior during Alcohol Intoxication) or a general medical condition (e.g., complex partial seizures. Note: In children, the symptoms are not attributable to imaginary playmates or other fantasy play.

65. DSM-IV:729; 490f., 727ff; also Lewis-Fernández 1998:389f. on formally establishing the category “possession trance disorder.”
66. Littlewood 1996:14.
67. Ibid.:14–15.
68. Cf. ibid.:12ff.
69. Ibid.:34.
70. Some of the Sanskrit stories discussed in the following chapters deny the latter. It is not uncommon to find references to a body vacated by its conscious controlling agent after this conscious agent has entered the body of another being. This can lead to ludicrous consequences, cf. the discussion on the Bhagavadajjukāprahasana in Chapter 8.
71. Levy et al. 1996:19.
72. Fuchs 1964:131.
73. Harper 1963:166. An important article on the value of Western psychoanalytic categories and psychiatric labeling in cultures in which the norms of mental health (and illness) may be different from those in the Western cultures that produce these categories and labels is Murphy 1976. Murphy’s views are accepted uncritically by Weiss (1977:5). This is problematic and is dealt with in Chapter 12.
74. Harper 1963:166.
75. Honko 1998:137.
76. Honko himself admits that the epic, its oral tradition, and the social forces and functions surrounding them are both too complex and too localized to offer such unilateral interpretations (1998:147). Antti Pakaslahti described to me a similar scenario in north India:
    I have taped a long conversation between an Indian patient and Indian psychiatrist. More precisely it was not really a dialogue but a composition of two intermittent monologues, quite surrealistic, at times like an Ionesco play. The patient talked about spirits, devotion, and rituals, the psychiatrist about hysteria, depression and therapy. Neither understood what the other was saying. The doctor considered the patient to be an uneducated believer in black magic and supernatural beings. The patient was wondering what on earth the psychiatrist was trying to say with all his complicated, strange words which made no sense to him. (personal communication, October 2001)
77. Freud 1955[1919]:224; 1972:235.
78. Bargen 1997:21. This is one of the few studies of possession in classical Asian literature that I have been able to find. Consistent with the findings of many anthropologists, Bargen states that, in the Tale of Genji, “spirit possession is an individual woman’s response to pervasive discontent rather than the inherited affliction of a single person, family, or clan” (p. 246).
79. Freud 1955[1919]:234; 1972:246.
80. Freud 1962:242; see also Mayes 1998:101.
81. Cf. Freud 1959[1923]:446: “Cases of demoniacal possession correspond to the neuroses of the present day.”
82. Garrett 1987:4.
83. Ibid.
84. See note 41. Masson’s final assessment of asceticism is that it is “unconsciously active sadism that expresses itself in extreme piety or even gets turned back against oneself” (1976:625; 1999:247). That this speaks more about Masson than about asceticism as a vigorous Indian socioreligious phenomenon was revealed almost two decades later in his stinging critique of his father’s relationship with Paul Brunton (1993). Cf. also Kripal 1995:303, 358n71.
85. A recent far-reaching model proposed by Mayes shows promise. Capitalizing on Freud’s notion of the externalizing primitive and internalizing civilized, discussed above, she discusses possession as a “primal fantasy of being moved or contained from without [which] may have either a negative or positive interpretation: at one pole is a desired state of rapturous surrender to external interpenetrating management, while at the other is a feared state of enforced submission to an invasive alien power” (1998:103).
86. Freed and Freed 1964:152–171.
87. See esp. Obeyesekere 1970:97–111; 1977; 1981.
88. Kripal 1995:39, 271, 335, 340n63, 357n46. See also Vaidyanathan and Kripal 1999, which is helpful because many of its essays actively engage the critical question of the validity of Freud’s psychoanalytic enterprise to Indian and Hindu cultures. The most important chapters dealing with this issue in this collection are by Parsons, Ramanujan, Kurtz, and Kakar. All of these essays can be called comparativist in the true sense of looking at cultures that are constituted differently, and they all suggest ways in which Freud must be emended in order for his theories to apply to India.
89. Castillo 1994b: 142–152.
90. Although the review of the book by Svāmī Ātmajñānānanda (1997) is meritorious on many counts, there can be little doubt that the Svāmī’s engagement in the Ramakrishna Mission colored the review. Svāmī Ātmajñānānanda’s suggestions have been taken to heart by Kripal in the second edition of his book (1998). Certain other reviews have been more favorable; see, for example, the reviews by Patton (1996b); Haberman (1997): McLean (1997); and Padoux (1999). The most important and illuminating of the positive reviews, however, is in a review article by Parsons (1997), which illustrates the benefits of Kripal’s comparativist approach, especially when compared to two other seriously flawed psychoanalytically based biographies of Ramakrishna, by Sil (1991) and Kakar (1991). Among the less-positive reviews of this book, the better are by Urban (1998) and Walker (1998). See also the exchange between Larson and Kripal: Larson’s challenge in JAAR (1997), and Kripal’s response (1998). Kripal defends himself against the charge that the book’s final conclusions are monocausally reductive. But Larson was not the only reviewer to level this charge; Walker and Urban would agree with Larson.
91. Echoing what has been stated in certain reviews of the book (cf. Urban 1998), I might also criticize the book, though mildly, for its lack of attention to historical context. Kripal never asks why, in nineteenth-century Bengal, its prosperity punctuated regularly by oppression, floods, epidemics (notably a malaria epidemic in the late 1860s), famine (a major pan-Indian famine in the 1870s, which sent birth rates plummeting), not to speak of the usual “fever” and cholera, most other males (Bengali or otherwise) did not become homosexual or resort to ecstatic behavior. In fact, the average life span in India—Bengal was no exception—was thirty-six years according to the census of 1881, a statistic that was computed after eliminating infant and early childhood mortality. When adjusted for these factors, the average lifespan dropped to twenty-three years. Thus it is a safe guess that most men lost their fathers at a young age. Although this is a minor point given the overall scope of Kripal’s book, it is important to point out, if for no other reason than as an argument for more broadly based and interdisciplinary studies of issues in the history of religions. Cf. Report on the Census of British India (1883) pp. 142ff., 170ff. On Bengal as a historical center of prosperity, contrary to popular impressions, see Greenough 1982, ch. 1.
92. Caldwell 1999, esp. ch. 5.
93. Ibid.:228f.; cf. Castillo 1994b.
94. For perceptive comments on this problem, see Claus 1979.
95. Bhattacharyya 1986:71; see also 59–75.
96. Ibid.:72.
97. Yet occasionally one finds cases that beg for psychoanalytic interpretations. Vijaya Ramaswamy (1997) had one fall into her lap, but failed to engage psychoanalysis. Ramaswamy writes of a contemporary saint in Tamilnadu, Andavan Pichchi (“Mad”) Amma, who at age fifty was dying when she was possessed by the spirit of Pinnavasal Swamigal, a disciple of the nineteenth-century mystic Sadasiva Brahmendra. This male possession of a female body, says Ramaswamy, “has led to biological problems for her. However it has also given her an in-depth knowledge of Vedanta and the Upanishads which Amma as an illiterate wife had no acquaintance with” (p. 6). I am ill equipped to venture a psychoanalytic interpretation, but any such interpretation would have to balance Amma’s biological problems with the fact that she was also healed of her mortal affliction.
98. Caldwell 1996:222n22.
99. Ibid.
100. Freeman 1993:134. Humphrey and Laidlaw observe that even “unconsciously,” possession bears ritual patterning: “The phenomenon of spirit possession trance also demonstrates this: people coming out of these trances commonly say they do not know what they were doing and their family does not hold them responsible for their words and actions. Yet during the possession trance people act in specific, patterned ways (the circling of the head and shoulders) and not in the other numberless ways possible. This indicates that even ritualized possession is in some sense ‘directed’ and not totally formless, incoherent activity” (1994:235).
101. Nuckolls 1991a:58. See also Nuckolls 1991b; and for a deeper view of some of the cultural phenomena behind Jalari spirit possession, see Nuckolls 1997.
102. Sax (1991a) reports instances of oracular possession in festivals in Garhwal, where people randomly rush up to a possessed individual to ask for help in solving their problems. This sort of description is absent from Sanskrit literature.
103. Nuckolls 1991b:76.
104. Nuckolls replicates the structure that Bell (1992) attributes to anthropologists generally: that the ritual resolves a contradiction.
105. For example, see Sharp 1993, which examines possession as a mode of political consciousness embedded in religious experience. Among the varieties of possession she examines, one is of mass possession in the public schools, largely of adolescent migrant girls (222ff.). In one instance of this, a powerful healer was consulted. He reported that the local ancestors were angry because the French paid no regard to the sacredness of the ancestral ground on which the school was built, moving and destroying tombs. The healer recommended the performance, on the school grounds, of a ceremony honoring the deceased ancestors, including the sacrifice of an ox. After this performance, the possession diminished considerably. It is difficult to imagine a school system in India that would accede to such a request.
106. See Diemberger 2005 for the role of female mediums in Tibetan politics. She writes: “Indeed, from historical sources we know that in ancient Tibet spirit possession had a central position in the political system and that women had an important role in embodying this institution” (p. 144). Diemberger’s excellent study appeared too late for me to take full advantage of it.
107. Claus writes, with respect to the compelling nature of these interpretations to academics, “Spirit possession is almost invariably viewed by anthropologists in psychological or sociological frameworks” (1979:30).
108. In my view, the works of Caldwell, Erndl, Freeman, Hiltebeitel, and Knipe excel here. See, e.g., Knipe 1989; also Sontheimer 1989b.
109. Claus 1984:63.
110. Hancock 1995:62. See Dernbach 2005, for a detailed argument that female possession on the island of Chuuk in Micronesia is both a discourse and a mode of cultural continuity and change.
111. Ibid.:63.
112. Sax 1991a:41, 184, 194.
113. Heesterman’s grandest statement on this issue in Vedic ritual is his 1993 book, The Broken World of Sacrifice. Heesterman may have overhistoricized what the Vedic poets intended poetically or metaphorically, but his efforts are nevertheless noteworthy. See my review of this book (F. Smith 1995).
114. Dirks 1992:216.
115. See Atkinson 1992 for a thoroughly documented account of the decline in the 1960s and subsequent revival of the concept of shamanism in ethnographic discourse. That the word shaman is possibly a derivation from Sanskrit śamaṇa (< śramaṇa), as Altaicists generally believe (though Tocharian is an option), does not help in determining the nature of shamanism as it is thought of today, even in India. See the discussion by Menges (1989), who supports the derivation, citing a letter from Sir Harold Bailey to Carmen Blacker (Bailey, cited in Blacker 1975:321–22n4) that traces the term through Prakrit, Saka, Tokharian, Sogdian “and other forms in Uigur Turkish, Asokan Greek and New Persian until it reached China as sha-men. Thence it made its way to Japan as shamon” (ibid.:23). In addition to the references cited here, see those cited in the articles on South Asian, Himalayan, and Tibetan shamanism in Walter and Fridman 2004:741–798.
116. Lewis 1989[1971]:57.
117. Ibid.:55–56.
118. A critique against which he explicitly defends himself in the “Preface to the Second Edition” (Lewis 1989:10).
119. However, for a strong defense of Lewis, at least on this point, see Gellner 1994:27–48.
120. This is being increasingly recognized by scholars; cf. Gellner 1994; Humphrey and Laidlaw 1994; Pakaslahti 1998.
121. Gombrich 1988:36–37.
122. Cf. Eliade: “To be sure, shamans are sometimes found to be ‘possessed,’ but these are exceptional cases for which there is a particular explanation” (1964:6).
123. Bourguignon 1979:261.
124. Ripinsky-Naxon (1993), who has written a wide-ranging and dense distillation of the phenomenology of shamanism, argues for restricting the domain of shamanism to the realm of soul-journeying, while presenting almost unlimited variations on this theme. However, he does state, rightly: “It is easy to confuse folk beliefs and spirit possession with shamanism” (p. 67). Nevertheless, most modern scholars would admit possession into the realm of shamanism, which they regard as a rather open category.
125. Obeyesekere 1984:13–14. See also the excellent (and underutilized) study by Wirz (1954). This study recognizes in twentieth-century Ceylon some of the possessing “seizers” (graha.) that occur in the classical literature, especially the rakṣas, yakṣa, and preta.
126. Pettigrew and Tamu (1994:416–422) demonstrate that ecstasy and possession are uneasy partners in Gurung shamanism in Nepal. Related is Rouget’s criticism of the confusion of “ecstasy” and “trance” (1985:312). Trance, he says, is accompanied by convulsions, music, noise, amnesia, and an audience, while ecstasy is characterized by silence, immobility, and solitude. In the South Asian experience, the characteristics of both may be found alternating in the possessed (see the discussion of Knipe’s work on raudra and śānta in Chapter 8). See also Diemberger’s helpful critique of Lewis, in which she demonstrates that though Lewis’s gendered distinction between central and peripheral possession may be applicable in Tibet (male as central, female as peripheral—a distinction that is largely inapplicable in India), Lewis’s distinction between “lower” and “higher” does not work, largely because such hierarchical positionings shift rapidly in different, even neighboring, communities (2005:145-146).
127. Lewis 1989:15.
128. Examples abound. See, e.g., Biardeau 1989a and 1989b; Hiltebeitel 1991; for Nepal see, e.g., Macdonald (1975), who translates the threatening ranting of a gaine (professional beggar/minstrel who is possessed by Bhat Bhateni), “a divinity whose altar is to be found not far from the Snow View Hotel in Kathmandu, a divinity famous for its murders of new-born children” (p. 116).
129. Sharp 1993:15; see also her excellent summary of anthropological perspectives on possession, pp. 14ff.
130. Cf. Shirokogoroff 1935:269.
131. Ibid.:274, cited by Maskarinec 1998:viii. See also Siikala 1982. Also relevant to the discussion is During Caspers (1992), who argues that certain inscriptions, masks, and other items of material culture from the Indus civilization reveal the presence of shamanism in that culture, probably as a survival from earlier, more characteristically shamanistic hunter-gatherer cultures farther north. Although it may be part of During Caspers’s project to argue for an Indus civilization shamanism based on likely regional antecedents, it is not part of my project to argue that possession as an aspect of shamanism is based on models from that earlier civilization. The evidence is simply too fragmentary and random to say any more than that it is possible.
132. Inglis (1985) argues that most of the possession in Tamilnadu that may be considered oracular is not shamanic, strictly speaking.
133. Other instances of gods descending into humans in a manner departing from the shamanistic norm may be cited, most famously the oracle at Delphi.
134. Sontheimer 1997:80, 106, 174, passim; 1989a:142–146. Stablein (1976), who studied Tibetan Buddhism in Nepal, also sees possession as shamanistic. In fact, he sees possession as the main connection between shamanism and Vajrayāna Buddhism, a theme taken up by Samuel (1993), but contested by Gombrich (1997).
135. Sontheimer 1989:142.
136. Ibid.:145.
137. Srinivas 1998:178. Kakar also recognizes different categories of shaman, which to him, too, is a rather large category of spirit healers (1982:89ff., passim). Also important for shamanism in tribal cultures is Jones 1968. Jones’s primary influence was Eliade; he wrote before Lewis and his critics and was unaware of the article by Rubin discussed in note 138.
138. For an early enthusiastic article on shamanism in India, see Ruben (1940), who regards almost everything dramatic from the Ṛgveda and Avesta through early Buddhism to early twentieth-century ethnographies as manifestations of shamanism and argues for its presence in India. He writes of magical flight, magical dreams, animal sacrifice and totemism as suggestive of shamanism, drawing on a bewildering array of cross-cultural comparisons that would be forbidden in more recent scholarship. His work is a reminder of how difficult it was sixty-five years ago, and still is today, to say exactly what shamanism is.
139. Paper 1995:85. In this cautiously recommended general study of religion “on the ground” in China, Paper has devoted two chapters to “ecstatic functionaries in Chinese religion” (pp. 51–124). For a more thorough critique of this book, see F. Smith 2001a.
140. Claus 1979:29. Nabokov (2000: 187n2) comments lucidly on the use of the terms shaman, oracle, trance-therapist, and possession-medium by various scholars.
141. These texts remain untranslated from Bengali. I am indebted to Frank Korom for this information. The only notable account of the maṅgalkābyas is by Zbavitel 1976:156–169. See also W. Smith 1980.
142. For an interesting critique of Lewis, see Kjaerholm 1982: 185ff. Kjaerholm’s article is seriously flawed from an Indologist’s perspective, though he rightly (and vigorously) calls for an understanding of cultural representations of personhood as a prerequisite for understanding possession. More appropriate for the South Asian context is Jones 1976, which suggests four, rather than two, categories of possession: peripheral, tutelary, reincarnate, and oracular.
143. Geertz 1983:59. I agree with Flood’s methodological suggestions regarding a dialogue between scholarly and indigenous narrativization (1999:139ff.).
144. Goodman 1988. Curiously, this work is not mentioned in Boddy’s review article (1994).
145. See references in note 14.
146. See Cuneo’s discussion (2001:273ff.) on the existence of spirits based on his observation of more than fifty exorcisms in late twentieth-century America.
147. See Castillo 1994a:145, 156, and references therein.
148. Boddy 1994:413.
149. See Claus 1979, 1984; Halperin 1996; also Nourse 1996.
150. Moreno 1985.
151. Halperin 1996:36.
152. This is true elsewhere, cf. Lewis 1989[1971], for extended discussions of this; also, e.g., Kendall 1985, 1988.
153. Cf., e.g., Erndl (1993), Harper (1963); and Nabokov (2000), all of whom nuance their studies differently while illustrating the utility of this perspective.
154. Keller 2002:82.
155. Most important here are Bell’s elaborations of Foucault’s notion of “ritualized agency” (1992:197ff.).
156. It need hardly be re-emphasized that “If there can be said to be such a thing as prelogical mentality, it can surely be found in our own midst and not just in Others” (Jensen and Geertz 1991:17).
157. See F. Smith 2001a and the books reviewed therein.
158. Trawick 1992:153–154.
159. As for the danger, see Harper 1969, for an account of the perceived danger of widows and more general fear of women among certain brahmans of coastal Karnataka.
160. See Caldwell 1999:217, for a summary of scholarly views on the relationship between women’s possession and sexual and aggressive emotions. Now see Diemberger 2005, who argues that female oracular possession in Tibet is an aspect of a peculiar “female competence” (p. 141). Women, in part because they are often outside the system of social ranking, in part because they have been largely responsible for child-rearing and in part because they “have a deep knowledge of the kinship-network as patrilocally married wives” (p. 143), are experts at mediating small-scale conflicts and threats to the coherence of the community. As such, it is part of their hereditary religious role to serve as oracles, a role also attested in India (and elsewhere).
161. Cf. Gellner 1994; Hancock 1995.
162. Hancock 1995:62. Although smārtas are followers of the advaitin Śaṅkarācāryas (especially of Kanchi and Sringeri) and are (in theory, at least) guided by the smṛti texts, they engage in popular goddess worship. As Hancock (along with many others) notes, “The Śaṅkarācāryas (all of whom are men) are said to have merged with the goddess” (p. 71). This is an old notion, as the attribution to Śarikara of dozens of hymns to the goddess testifies.
163. Egnor 1980:12–13. This excellent essay discusses, among other things, the relationship between devotion (bhakti), power (śakti) and feeling (Ta. uṇarcci).
164. Ibid.:15.
165. Ibid.:27.
166. Erndl 1996; see also Wadley 1976. The equestrian theme is a common and potent metaphor in possession cults throughout the world: a medium is mounted by a spirit who takes the reins of control. Halperin (1996:33) notes that in Afro-Brazilian trance dancing a medium is called a “horse,” upon which a spirit rides. See also Deren 1991; Matory 1993; and Chapter 4, n. 189.
167. The theme of gender role-reversal is well known from Victor Turner’s The Ritual Process (1969). This is also proximate to Foucault’s reflections on the agency and power of subjectivity and on resistant “technologies of the self.” By shaping their own subjectivity, Indian women in possession can potentially thwart, challenge, or question the ways that they have been shaped by men. See Ransom (1997:152) for an explanation of the political impact of this aspect of Foucault’s project.
168. Gold and Raheja 1994.
169. Jamison 1996:42ff. In demonstrating that tying a cord around the waist of the sacrificer’s wife is ititiatory, Jamison has argued against a position that I took in my 1991 essay, that the act of binding the wife was also an act of suppression. While I agree with Jamison’s conclusions on the initiatory aspects of the rite, which I also stated in my article (though not as forcefully as she), I also believe that her conclusions do not necessarily contradict mine.
170. Zvelebil 1981:15–16. Zvelebil examined roughly four dozen occurrences of this word in old Tamil texts.
171. Ibid.:20.
172. Through examination of a broad sweep of Tamil texts, Rajam 1986 demonstrates that the term aṇaṅku has a much greater semantic range than Hart supposed. Rajam finds instances of the word in the senses of sexuality, undefeatable quality, a celestial woman, a male ascetic, a source of distress, the supernatural capacity of an ocean, and so on. Furthermore, she discovers that, when used for a woman’s force, it is not necessarily inherent or sacred. For a thorough discussion of the word, see also Dubianski 2000:6–19. Burrow, in his 1979 review of Hart 1976 defines aṇaṅku as “the possessing spirit” and “the state of possession” and cites the expression aṇaṅk āṭu (= teyvam āṭ, to dance under possession of a spirit).
173. Shulman 1981:55, esp. ch. 2, “The Phenomenon of Localization” (pp. 40–89).
174. See, for example, Chapter 4, pp. 140–142, on possession during the Debaddhani festival in Assam.
175. Emeneau 1938, cited by Zvelebil 1981:13.
176. This supports Daniel’s observations (1984) on the coextensiveness and “substantial” or “fluid” relationship, or even identity, between place and individual in south India.
177. See Daniel 1984; Singer 1984, esp. chs. 3 and 6.
178. Marriott 1976:110. See now the perspicacious remarks of Sax 2002:9–15.
179. Marriott 1976:111.
180. The word ākarṣaṇa is used in Bengali to denote the power of place due to its habitation by a deity; a “magnetic pull.” I thank Frank Korom for this. The “magnetic pull” of a temple or deity is a familiar experience in India; thus it is possible that the Simhala usage reported by Obeyesekere encompasses this.
181. Obeyesekere 1984:14.
182. Cf. Bühnemann 2000; Goudriaan 1978:294ff.; cp. Türstig 1985:101ff. The lists of ṣaṭ karmāṇi in Türstig’s texts do not mention ākarṣaṇa. I am unable to locate āruḍha in the sense of possession in any Sanskrit text.
183. Nabokov 2000:15. Her entire discussion on this issue is worth examining.
184. Ibid. :14. See Marriott and Inden 1977.
185. Blackburn 1988; Frasca 1990; Hiltebeitel 1988, 1991; Upadhyaya and Upadhyaya 1984.
186. Erndl 1993.
187. Sax 1991b, 1995. Other studies worth mentioning are, on Kerala, the work of Richmond and others in Richmond, Swann, and Zarrilli 1990; on Garhwal pilgrimage, Sax 1991a; on Rajasthan, Gold 1987. Also of interest is Ramanujan’s discussion of the relationship between possession and performance (1986a).
188. Schoembucher 1993:242.
189. Hiltebeitel 1989b.365.
190. Cf. Korom 1999; Norbeck 1974, 1976.
191. Driver 1991:177–78. In tones familiar to some of the issues we are grappling with, Driver notes that in Christianity there is a wide gulf between liturgists/ theologians and advocates of possession:
     To “get the spirit”—that is, to become filled with the immediate presence of the deity—is the essence of the sacramental act, although this truth has been obscured, not to say suppressed, in those churches that have come to put high value on their social respectability and thus to shy away from experiences that are strongly antistructural, preferring the shelter of this world’s customs even in ritual. In these circumstances, the experience of possession (being filled with something) during a sacrament has been more or less banished, its place taken by an emphasis on symbolism. (pp. 208-209)
192. Sax 1991a:41n6.
193. Wadley 1976:235; see also Dumont and Pocock (1959:55f.), who note that an exorcist or priest mediates from man to deity, but an oracle mediates from deity to man.
194. Macdonald 1976:310. The reader must compensate for the masculine pronouns here because, as Merz and many others have shown, most of the jhkri are dyah-mā, women. Perhaps the most complete account of exorcism in Tibetan Buddhism is Mumford 1989:140–162.
195. These personal experience narratives have not received the scholarly attention they deserve; cf. Korom 1997, esp. 570ff; 1999.
196. See Bellamy 2004 for an account of different kinds of hāzri at a healing site called Husain Tekdi in Rajasthan. She records the Hindi term vaḥ hājri bhar rahā haiṃ (he is filling that presence).
197. Cf. Nasir 1987. Like much else reported in this chapter, baiṭhak in Peshawar was the province of women. It is also very formal, includes songs, and is used for healing purposes. Vimalananda’s use of the term is nonspecific and does not reflect this context.
198. Svoboda 1986:212.
199. Ibid.
 
    