+++
title = "‘Nysa in India’ & the"
full_title = "‘Nysa in India’ & the Related Narratives"
date = "2021-12-17"
upstream_url = "https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/12/17/nysa-in-india-the-related-narratives/"

+++
Source: [here](https://cestlaviepriya.wordpress.com/2021/12/17/nysa-in-india-the-related-narratives/).

‘Nysa in India’ & the Related Narratives

... 


#### Dionysiac claims
Notwithstanding the nativity of these traditions, the art of the region
was still claimed by some to be related to the Greek traditions of
Dionysus. The predominant art of the region of not just these tribes but
also including the entire Swat valley (the earlier territory of Kamboja
and Gandhara) also has been called ‘Dionysiac’ for their prolific use of
wine and ‘Bacchalic scenes.’ But, is it really ‘Dionysiac’? As wine
consumption and the other related art is well attested in the context of
the Western classical world and medieval Iran (Filigenzi, 2019: 56),
this resulted in a tendency to see such art form in the Swat valley to
be hierarchically dependent on the western classical world.

It is a fact that wine consumption seems to have existed in Swat valley
from a long time as supported by the archaeological finds of the region.
The following excerpt from Filigenzi’s paper is helpful in this regard:

> “The assemblages of the proto-historic graveyards of Swat (*c*. 1700–300
BCE) include a large number of the so called “brandy-bowls,” *i.e.*
drinking vessels characterised by hemispherical, globular or carinated
bodies on a high foot. Although no traces of substances were detected,
their connection to the ceremonial practice of libation is nonetheless
manifest. Some sort of intoxicating liquid was indeed consumed in
proto-historic Swat, probably beyond the funerary context as
well.”[^61]

Then there is also the evidence of the archaeological grains including
grapevine from the settlements in the region (Filigenzi, 2019: 60).
Archaeo-botanists estimate that in the Early Neolithic times, the
ancient north west of the Indian sub-continent must have played an
important role in the domestication of the wild grapevine. After all,
wild grapevine is still found in the region (Filigenzi, 2019: 60).
Filigenzi mentions that palaeo-botanical evidence of cultivated grapes
is recorded in the Indian subcontinent from the third millennium BCE
onwards. There also have been found many stone tanks, interestingly near
rock shelters (that cover a wide period from the Bronze age to even
10^(th)-12^(th) century).**⁶² **The shelters have been connected with
transhumant pastoralists as Filigenzi calls them like those of the
Dardic culture. The stone tanks are of both the kinds- winepresses and
the vats. Hence, there is a sound reasoning behind the statement of
Filigenzi when she states that consumption of wine in Swat was a
component of the normal ambit of economic and cultural life, therefore
it would be much better to use a neutral phrase of ‘revelry scenes’ to
describe such art from Swat instead of ‘Dionysiac’.[^63]

##### Indr
The connection of wine and gods of Kafirs of Hindu Kush is amply
explained by Filigenzi:

“..an important cult place in honour of Indr, also used for meetings of
important men, was the Indr-ta in Wama, in Southern Nuristan. Indr is
the Kafir version of the Vedic Indra. Like the latter, he is the ruler
of the atmosphere and atmospheric phenomena, and as such is connected in
Kafiristan with rainbows and earthquakes (Jettmar 1986, 64). As
originally connected to ritual consumption of.., Indr is also the god of
wine and owns vineyards (Jettmar 1986; Chandra 1998, 151). In
particular, the Indrakun garden, an orchard located high above the Pech
River, where fruit trees grow embraced by wild vines, traces its origin
back to Indr, who, according to the local folklore, carved the vats into
the boulders himself and visits the garden each summer.” (Filigenzi,
2019: 74-75).

The grape harvest was then celebrated with a festival in honour of Indr
in Indra-ta. The celebration involved ample use of wine, goat sacrifice,
dancing and singing and merriment. Another excerpt from Filigenzi’s
paper explains the festivities:

“On this occasion, a large cult image of Indr was taken from his temple
(Indr-ama) out into the village and placed in the centre of the Indr-ta,
on a boulder that served as a base, next to which was a sacred tree
(already dead at the time of Edelberg’s visit in 1948). Two long rows of
stones were used as sitting places for high-ranking men who used to
drink much wine stored in the Indr-ama. Between the rows of stones there
was a flat dancing ground and, in the vicinity, four stone wine vats
(watkuna). The effigy of Indr was honoured by pouring wine on it and by
sacrificing to it several he-goats and one or two oxen, whose blood was
thrown on the sacrificial fire while ‘priests’ sung hymns.”

Interestingly, a temple of Dionysus on the mountain of Nysa (a mountain
here; not a city) has also been described by Appolonius of Tyana who
visited India in 1^(st) century CE. The festivities described have close
similarities with the Indrakun tradition. Though, the text has been
considered unreliable, yet Filigenzi considers this an evidence of
persistence of the connection that was made between the ‘god of wine’
and Dionysus. (Filigenzi, 2019: 75).

##### Soroadeios
Another intriguing fact that Filigenzi mentions testifies to the
presence of concept of *‘god of wine’* in the Gandhar region when
Alexander was in India.

> “Falk (2009, 65) recalled the Gandharan god Soroadeios (a high ranking
yakṣa?) mentioned by Chares of Mitylene, a Greek historiographer who
followed Alexander in his military expedition into Asia. Of Chares’
Stories about Alexander (Peri Alexandron historiai), only a few
fragments survive in citations and excerpts. From the relevant passage,
quoted by Athenaios of Naukratis (Deipnosophistai 1.48.64), we know that
Chares translated the name Soroadeios (i.e. the Greek phonetic version
of an unknown Indian original) as oinopoios, ‘wine maker.'”[^64]

##### Balima
The connection of Indr of the Kafir religion with the Vedic Indra was
very obvious but even the visiting god of the Kalash religion in the
sacred time of Chaumos (from Sanskrit meaning four months) who is called
Balimain (Cacopardo, 2011: 74) has emphatic connections with Vedic
Indra. Balima (*bal’ima*) as per scholar Caco would be an epithet
meaning ‘powerful’ borrowed from Kati, while In would stand for Indra,
so the Balimain would mean ‘powerful Indr.’ In fact the Kalasha
themselves address Balimain as Indr in songs and invocations.[^65]

There is no doubt that clear similarities exist between these native
religious beliefs of the ancient Indian north-west and the Dionysus
traditions. For example, visit of Balimain is brief because he departs
at the end of Chaumos, while the god of wine Dionysus was believed to
stay for the winter on earth to leave only in spring (Cacopardo, 2011:
74)…. Balima-In, like Dionysos, is a hermaphrodite: he is represented as
male on the right side and female on the left side.[^66] 

##### Shiva
It’s fascinating to note that these traits of Balima-In and Dionysus are also
well known and much prominent part of god Śiva. Dionysus and Śiva also
share more obvious similarities with both of them being the lords of
animals. The bull is also important part of traditions of Śiva and is
connected to Dionysus at the same time; the tradition of being related
to intoxicating drinks is also common to both. Interestingly, there is
also an example of carved Śiva from the Yungang Grottoes in China,
curiously depicted holding grapes thus suggesting a Sogdian connection
of Śiva with grapes (and possibly wine?). At this point, readers may
remember that Herodotus had already specifically related, as mentioned
above, the similarities in the habits of Bactrians and ancient the
north-west Indians (ancient Kamboja and Gandhāra). So, there is a trail
of similarities that can be traced between these regions and their
religious beliefs from India to Central Asia (like the importance of
goat/ibex, wine, bull, etc) right from the ancient times.

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/shiva-ji-grapes.jpg?w=959)

A carved depiction of god Śiva holding grapes from the Yungang Grottoes
in Shanxi, China (5th century CE).
([Source](http://www.art-and-archaeology.com/china/datong/yg10.html))
([WikiMedia Commons
Link](https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Datong_158.jpg))

The connection of these gods with wine is a fascinating point for
research. These peculiar similarities of the Kafir-Kalash culture with
the European culture, as per Cacopardo might suggest some very ancient
connection between them including the festival cycles, the use of
juniper, the music etc. but he admits that these are only random
parallels at best and a detailed study of European folk traditions would
be needed to draw some conclusions.[^67]

#### Dionysus from India
While the tradition of Dionysus conquering India on his way to the Greek
shores has been mentioned before, there is also another very intriguing
and lesser known tradition that Cacopardo has shed light on. Euripides
is the first to mention that Dionysos was actually born in India and had
travelled to Greece after a childhood spent in Nysa or on Mount
Meros.[^68] He cites on the authority of Grossato that based on the
available archaeological and ethnobotanical evidence, there is a strong
possibility of the tradition of Dionysos and his lesser known legend of
Indian origin to actually signifying the route along which the vine and
viticulture expanded west from Central Asia, especially because this
expansion coincides pretty well with the route followed by the god
(Cacopardo, 2011: 76).

To explain the point regarding the ‘Wine-Route’, it would be better to
quote an excerpt from Cacopardo’s paper:

> “At the present state of research it seems that the cultivation of the
vine first developed south of the Caucasus where the wild sub-species of
the vitis vinifera Linnei, the vine at the origin of 99% of the wine
produced today, still prospers. This vine, however, is found as far east
as Tajikistan, i.e. just north of the Hindu Kush. The itinerary that was
later to become the famed Silk-route, Grossato (Ib.) further suggests,
may earlier have been the Wine-route. If we consider that an
autochthonous vine – vitis nuristanica Vassilcz – is found in Nuristan
(Neubauer 1974; Edelberg & Jones 1979: 35) and that the southern slopes
of the chain would have been just as well (if not better) fit for the
production of grapes (cf. Olmo 2000), it appears that our area may be,
if not the very first, at least one of the first wine-producing zones in
Eurasia; that Nysa was in the Paropamisos, i.e. the Hindu Kush, is on
the other hand part of the myth. 
> 
> The circumstance that the goat is one
of the two animals more closely associated with Dionysos could be taken
as a further indication in this direction: the Hindu Kush is apparently
the home of the breed of wild goat which is considered to be the
progenitor of all domestic goats (Snoy 1959: 528). In this context, I
believe, the similarities between Balimain and Dionysos could be
explained by their connection with wine. Rather than of an influence
reaching the Hindu Kush from Greece, no matter when, I believe we should
think in this case of the exact opposite, i.e. an Asian influence
reaching Greece. The route followed by Dionysos would in this case refer
to the itinerary along which viticulture spread west. 
> 
> This does not
imply of course that the figure of Dionysos should be seen as a direct
development of that of Balimain. It may be, rather, that both divine
figures may stem from a remote religious humus common to Greece and the
Indian world, that may be also at the roots of Śivaism (Cacopardo, 2011:
77).”

#### Wine and goat sacrifice
Regarding the art from these regions of ancient Kamboja and Gandhāra and
their depiction of goat sacrifices,[^69] they also seem to have a
close connection with the practices of the Kafirs-Kalash tribes of the
Hindu Kush.

Two fascinating sculptures have been found (Filigenzi, 2019: 76) from
the region which curiously have the representation of both these
important aspects that we have considered – wine and goat sacrifice. One
is of a devī holding a beaker and a severed head of a goat and another
one (a small stele) probably of a male deity, also depicted with similar
traits – a goblet and a severed head of a goat!

![](https://cestlaviepriya.files.wordpress.com/2021/12/merged-deva-and-devi-and-goat.jpg?w=396)

First Image: A god holding a goblet and the severed head of a goat, from
Bīr-koṭ-ghwaṇḍai. Second Image: A goat-headed goddess holding a beaker
and the severed head of a goat. (Source – Filigenzi, 2019)

The Gandharan art which has been described as ‘Dionysiac’ surely
borrowed and learnt from the western attributes of art, particularly
dominant was the Greek element due to the long (almost two centuries)
of Greek stronghold in the region, but the traditions that were
portrayed in that art were purely local.

The Greek tradition according to which Dionysus was born out of the
thigh (Meros in Greek) of Zeus and the fact that there were some
mountains sacred to Kalash, one of them being Tirich Mir was considered
by some as another point which connected these far away people to each
other through kinship. But, these mountains are part of the native
mythology for the people of these valleys. They are considered to be the
favored seats of the fairies, as mentioned by Witzel in his study of the
Kalash religion, especially the impressive, 7708 m high pyramid of the
Kailāsa-like Tirich Mir in the North of Chitral (\~ Meru KaṭhB, Meros
Arrian, Anabasis 1.6; Sumeru, Pāli Sineru; cf. \*devameru, Shina díamer
= Nanga Parbat).[^70] Witzel is also of the opinion that the Hindu
Kush and Vedic mythology, ritual, and festivals, in spite of many layers
of developments and mutual influences, tend to explain each other very
effectively. And he also suggests that the Kalash religion has many
aspects of the Ṛgvedic religion. In fact, the practice of using wooden
coffins and exposing the interned dead bodies to the sun seems to be
much more influenced by the ancient Iranian traditions than the Greek.

...