---
title: Anugamana
---

Ritual suicide of widows (including at the husband's funeral pyre).

## Terms and forms
- "the Dharmashastras use a number of terms to refer to the ritual: “anugamana” (‘going after’), “sahagamana” (‘going with’), “anumarana” (‘dying after), “sahamarana” (‘dying with’), and “anvarohana” (‘mounting after). Even in popular usages, when the ritual is referred to as “satidaha”, “satipratha” or “sativrata”, the term Sati refers to the devoted wife, while the suffix describes the ritual aspect. Arvind Sharma notes that while Sahamarana (and hence Sahagamana) refers to the case of concremation, Anumarana (and hence Anugamana) refers to immolation of the widow after the dead husband’s cremation[7]." - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)
- anugamana, when performed in a politically charged historical context is also called jIvahara/ jowhar. 
  "Arvind Sharma notes how while the primary motive behind Jauhar was a desire to avoid being captured by the invading Muslim armies, Anugamana was performed by devoted widow[63]. Writing about the political context behind the evolution of Jauhar, Kaushik Roy notes how Jauhar was only practiced during Hindu-Muslim wars[64]. That is, Jauhar was practiced by Rajput women in order to avoid being captured, raped, and enslaved in the face of imminent defeat in the battle. What is generally referred to as Jauhar, in fact, has two elements: Jauhar-immolation by the womenfolk and Shaka ritual by the menfolk wherein they entered the final battle, fighting till they fell dead on the battlefield. As Lindsey Harlan notes: ‘”The jauhar sati dies before and while her husband fights what appears to be an unwinnable battle. By dying, she frees him from worry about her welfare and saves herself from the possible shame of rape by triumphant enemy forces[65].” That is, Jauhar served as the female counterpart of the male Shaka ritual, with both of them attaining Veer-gati i.e. attaining heaven due to heroic death."  - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)

## Eligibility
- "In any case, not all Pativrata Stree’s are eligible for Anugamana either. Vijnanesvara, the author of Mitakshara, the famous commentary on Yajnavalkya smriti notes: “And all of this constitutes the universal Law for all women right down to Candalas, provided that they are not pregnant and do not have young children (Mitakshara 1.86)[20].” Similarly, Madhavacharya in his commentary on Parashara Smriti (4.31), cites two scriptural authorities[21]: “A woman who has young children should not depart, thereby forsaking raising her young children; nor should a woman who is menstruating or has just given birth; and a pregnant woman should protect her fetus”; and “O beautiful princess, women do not ascend the funeral pyre when they have young children, when they are pregnant, when their menses have failed to appear at the regular time, and while they are menstruating.” ... Madhavacharya, though, qualifies the last of the criteria by saying that if the mother can make arrangement for proper guardians to take care of the young children, then they can opt for Anugamana." - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)
- "Nirnayasindhu of Kamalakara Bhatta and Dharmasindhu by Kashinath Upadhyaya, two important digests on Dharma composed during the medieval period, further note that the wives of husbands who died either for the sake of penance or were Dharmically fallen, should not perform Anugamana[26]. Dharmasindhu also notes that women who have committed adultery, who have been negatively disposed towards their husbands while they were alive do not have eligibility for this practice[27]." - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)

### brAhmaNa case
- "Then, there are a number of verses, which apparently prohibit the practice for the Brahmana widows. The two popular verses cited are ascribed to Paithinasi and Angirasa. Paithinasi notes: “Due to Vedic injunction a Brahmin woman should not follow her husband in death, but for the other social classes tradition holds this to be the supreme dharma of Women[22]”. Angirasa notes: “When a woman of Brahmin caste follows her husband in death, by killing herself she leads neither herself nor her husband to heaven[23].” ...  Thus, the Dharmashastra writers starting from Vijnaneshwara to Aparaarka and Madanapala, all have taken the verse to mean a prohibition of only the Anugamana (immolation of the widow on a separate pyre after the husband has been cremated) and not a prohibition of Sahagamana, wherein the widow is immolated together with her husband." - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)

## Optional nature
- "Starting from Aparaarka, the commentator on Yajnavalkya Smriti, who explicitly mentions “anvarohanam ca kamyatvad anityam” i.e. “Since, anvarohana is optional, it is not obligatory[28]” to later day commentators and writers of Dharmashastra up to as recent as Tryambakayajvan, who lived in 17th-18th century, all have clearly noted how the practice is optional." - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)
- "A verse from Brahma Purana quoted by Aparaarka, one of the commentator on Yajnavalkya Smriti, states: “There is no other recourse (than sahagamana) for a good woman when her husband dies, (for) there is no other way to extinguish the burning pain of being separated from her husband[30].” " - [Nithin](http://indiafacts.org/sati-dharmic-perspective/#_ednref14)

## Practice
- "Nevertheless, one shouldn’t foolishly imagine that this spread of sahagamana translated into a large number of satis. Overall, it was a very small number everywhere in bhArata. The real value of the so-called reformers’ contributions should thus be carefully re-evaluated. ... There is epigraphic data which reflects many widows being patrons of pious works/endowments, who commanded high respect. But more importantly, sahagamana was simply not a reality for the vast majority of cases (See Meenakshi Jain)."
- "As per numerous testimonies, most self-immolating widows went into the pyre voluntarily, often overcoming pressure from their relatives or from the authorities not to do it."
- "It was confined to the real or would-be warrior castes, though, in keeping with their ethos of pride and passion."

### Bengal misuse

- "The fact that people simply do not acknowledge in a discussion of sati in immediately pre-modern vangadesha is that it occurs in a context of a prevalence of dayAbhAga jurisprudence, which was much more supportive of various inheritance rights of wives & daughters."
- "This position did not arise out of thin air. The wife’s joint ownership in the husband’s property was traced to the veda, something that the old, orthodox commentator shabarasvAmin forcefully defends in his ancient commentary on the mImAMsA-sUtra."
- "So, to sum up, an ancient warrior-centered practice, already very rare (see Jain) & dying off in bhArata by the 18th century, was revived by some property-hungry criminal minds in a region, where the prevailing Hindu jurisprudence was pro-Wife-inheritance."

### Accounts
#### Bengal, early 19th century
> My uncle was lying a corpse in the adjoining room. It appeared to me that all the women assembled were admiring the virtue and fortitude of my aunt. Some were licking the betel out of her mouth, some touching her forehead in order to have a little of the sindur, or vermillion ; while not a few, falling before her feet, expressed a fond hope that they might possess a small particle of her virtue. Amidst all these surroundings, what surprised me most was my aunt's stretching out one of her hands, at the bidding of an old Bráhman woman, and holding a finger right over the wick of the burning lamp for a few seconds until it was scorched, and forcibly withdrawn by the old lady who bade her do so in order to test the firmness of her mind. The perfect composure with which she underwent this fiery ordeal fully convinced all that she was a real Sati, fit to abide with her husband in Boykunta, paradise. Nobody could notice any change in her countenance or resolution after she had gone through this painful trial.
> 
> It was about eleven o'clock when preparations were made for the removal of the corpse of my uncle to the Ghát. It was a small mourning procession, nearly thirty persons, all of respectable families, volunteered to carry the dead body alternately on their shoulders. The body was laid on a charpoy; my aunt followed it, not in a closed but in an open Palki. She was unveiled, and regardless of the consequences of a public exposure, she was, in a manner, dead to the external world. The delicate sense of shame so characteristic of Hindoo females was entirely suppressed in her bosom. In truth, she was evidently longing for the hour when her spirit and that of her husband should meet together and dwell in heaven. She had a tulsi málá (string of basil beads) in her right hand, which she was telling ; and she seemed to enjoy the shouts of “Hari, Hari-bole" with perfect serenity of mind. How can we account for the strange phenomenon that a sentient being, in a state of full consciousness, was ready to surrender at the feet of “Hari” the last spark of life for ever, without a murmur, a sigh, or a tear ? A deep, sincere religious faith, which serves as a sheet-anchor to the soul amidst the storms of life, can alone unriddle the enigma, and disarm death of its terrors. We reached Nimtallá Ghát about twelve ; and after staying there for about ten to fifteen minutes, sprinkling the holy water on the dead body, all proceeded slowly to Kultallá Ghát, about three miles north of Nimtallá. 
> 
> On arriving at the destination, which was the dreary abode of Hindoo undertakers, solitary and lonesome, the Police Darogah, who was also a Hindoo, came to the spot and closely examined my aunt in various ways attempting, if possible, to induce her to change her mind; but she, like Joan of Arc, was resolute and determined ; she gave an unequivocal reply to the effect that “such was her predestination, and reply to the effect that “such was her predestination, and that Hari had summoned her and her husband into the Boykanta.” The Darogah, amazed at the firmness of her mind, staid at the Ghát to watch the proceedings, while preparations were being made for a funeral pile, which consisted of dry firewood, faggots, pitch, with a lot of sandalwood, ghee, &c., in it to impart a fragrant odour to the air. Half a dozen bamboos or sticks were also procured, the use of which we afterwards saw and understood. We little boys were ordered to stand aloof. The Maruyepora Bráhman (priest who officiates on such occasions) came and read a few mantras, or incantations. The dead body wrapped in new clothes being placed on the pyre, my aunt was desired to walk seven times round it, which she did while strewing flowers, cowries (shells), and parched rice on the ground. It struck me at the time that, at every successive circumambulation, her strength and presence of mind failed; whereupon the Darogah stepped forward once more and endeavoured even at the last moment to deter her from her fatal determination. But she, at the very threshold of ghastly death, in the last hour of expiring life, the fatal torch of Yama (Pluto) before her, calmly ascended the funeral pile, and lying down by the side of her husband, with one hand under his head and another on his breast, was heard to call, in a half suppressed voice, “Hari, Hari,”—a sign of her firm belief in the reality of eternal beatitude. When she had thus laid herself on the funeral pyre, she was instantly covered, or rather choked with dry wood, while some stout men with the bamboos held and pressed down the pyre, which was by this time burning fiercely on all sides. A great shout of exultation then arose from the surrounding spectators, till both the dead and living bodies were converted into a handful of dust and ashes. When the tragic scene was brought to a close, and the excitement of the moment subsided, men and women wept and sobbed, while cries and groans of sympathy filled the air.


## Legal status
> For Brahmins it was forbidden, a negative judgment going back to this Rg-Vedic verse. ... It is only logical that some rulers in the Brahmin-dominated Maratha confederacy forbid the practice even before the British East India Company Governor Lord William Bentinck (under prodding from Hindu reformer Ram Mohan Roy) abolished it by law in 1829.


## Origins
From [GA19](https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1133361296047349760.html):

1. It seems to be a kSatriya practice of NW provenance as far as bhArata is concerned. However, the practice definitely had external roots. (Continue reading)
2. Initial reaction by brAhmaNas, prominently medhAtithi, was stern opposition as the shruti condemns those who end their life before the expiry of its natural term. Even if brAhmaNas couldn’t prevent sahagamana’s popularity among kSatriyas, they disliked it for their own women.
3. Subsequent rise in prominence & support for sahagamana rests on secondary citations of smRtis as exceptions to the shruti’s general rule against suicide; most of which are not traceable to the cited sources.
4. There are similar practices of “Widow-suicide” among Scythians & Manchus, with studies showing how Manchus inherited it from an Altaic culture. There is a genuine case for sahagamana having come from warrior tribes from far northwest of bhArata+Central Asia.
5. sahagamana definitely predated Muslim invasions but this doesn’t necessarily make it a Hindu practice. It was a practice of origin that came to be accepted as a deshAcAra for certain regions’ kSatriyas before attaining a wider spread across varNas & deshas.


## Other references
- Koenraad Elst for more details [here](http://www.hinduhumanrights.info/sati-and-hinduism/), sati-strategy [here](https://bharatabharati.wordpress.com/2016/03/24/the-sati-strategy-koenraad-elst/).
