+++
title = "03 The Devil’s Work"

+++
Because possession is deeply embedded in the complexities of local culture and ritual, it is important to exercise caution in formulating general theories about it.23 Although it is not my intention to present a general theory, it is nevertheless necessary to present different viewpoints regarding possession, particularly because most available theories have been applied to possession in India. To begin, the interpretation of possession as the work of demonic, ungodly beings is characteristically the property of certain Western Christian, usually Protestant, denominations, though, as shown below, South Asians themselves often enough accuse tantrikas in the temporary employ of local enemies of setting malevolent spirits on family members afflicted with mental illness. Commenting on studies of possession, though not singling out Christian perspectives, Nicholas Dirks comments: “Most of the literature on possession deals with the nasty kind, when it is the devil rather than the lord who has taken up residence within our mortal coil.”24 This may be stretching it a bit, especially given the explosion of possession studies among anthropologists since the 1960s. But it does constitute a well-represented viewpoint commonly invoked until the mid-twentieth century, one that has not been completely abandoned. It is more accurate to agree with Isabelle Nabokov, who observes that despite Christian missionary accounts of possession as “replete with prejudicial interpretations and factual errors, they still disclose a vibrant, well-established tradition of boundary transgressions between this world and the hereafter.”25

One (1991) proponent of this missionary viewpoint shows, if nothing else, that eighteenth- and nineteenth-century “orientalist” attitudes die slowly, stating that “possession by the evil one means losing control of the self.”26 This is not far from the language used almost three hundred years ago by Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg (1682–1719), the first Danish Protestant missionary in India, whose pre-enlightenment views were a precursor to imperialist Christianity. Ziegenbalg spoke of “devil dancers” in his “Genealogy of the Malabar Gods” (1713),27 a phrase that has cropped up for centuries. It was not, therefore, a complete surprise when, in 2000, the New York Times quoted the Reverend Bob Larson, a full-time, Vatican-sanctioned Roman Catholic exorcist operating out of Denver, Colorado, on the physical effects of exorcism. According to Larson, these may include violence, vomiting, and cursing on the part of the possessed: “Dealing with the Devil is ugly work. The Devil is ugly. Evil is ugly. When you get to what I call pure extreme evil, it’s not going to be pretty.” The Times article notes that in January 1999, “the Vatican issued a revised Catholic rite of exorcism for the first time since 1614, essentially reaffirming that Satan exists.”28

An article of a much higher caliber of statement than that on Reverend Larson, written by a Protestant missionary in Pakistan, appeared in a1990 issue of the journal Missiology. This article is of interest because it displays an anthropology parallel to that conducted by mainstream scholars—parallel but distinctly detached from it. It is recognizable to conventional scholarship because the data gathering is methodologically rigorous and linguistically sound. Yet, because of its source, it is not referred to in any secondary source that I have examined. The author of the article, Wayne McClintock, was employed by Interserve, formerly the Bible Medical Missionary Fellowship International, and reveals practically no familiarity with current scholarship on possession phenomena in South Asia. In the academic mainstream, this would be regarded as an unacceptable oversight for an article on folk demonology in Pakistani Panjab. However, McClintock’s motivations are different from those of the academic mainstream. After recording a good deal of phenomenological and linguistic data of some importance, McClintock’s conclusion is, at least for this reader, unexpected:

It is incumbent on persons bent on contextualizing the gospel among the rural peasantry of South Asia to grapple seriously with a worldview that perceives the misfortunes of life as attributable to some supernatural agency. Unless serious attempts are made by outsiders to understand this cosmos of demons and ghosts and its relevance to the everyday life of the rural villager, then efforts to incarnate the gospel message in a South Asian context will fail, and new believers will continue to be entangled in the web of syncretism.29

McClintock’s legitimate, if dated, anthropology, not to speak of his conclusions, locates him within a certain tradition which from our present perspective must be regarded as emic, and not peculiarly so, as it deals with faith-based assertions that assume a superior reason (and reasonableness) to what it clearly sees as other local contesting faith-based traditions. It seeks a victory for reason—Christian reason—over what it sees as an irrational, thus faulty, emotion-laden and superstitious belief system.30

This victory of reason over emotion in religious doctrine (if not always in religious practice) is well documented and is rooted as much in institutional prerogatives as in theological ones (though, of course, often there is little difference between them)—reason is regarded as stable, stabilizing, measurable, and the result of conformity with theological writ, all of which is to say that reason is institutionally safe as well as godly. In contrast, emotion is unstable, destabilizing, unpredictable, and attributable to the invasion of evil spirits, which is to say that it is socially unsafe as well as ungodly. Reason, stability, and control are due to possession by God; emotion, instability, and spontaneity threaten theological order and may well be the product of the devil or symptomatic of possession by spirits. It is not difficult here to connect the ascendancy of reason, hence control, expressed in McClintock’s Christian writing to Gombrich’s observation, noted earlier, that “Brahmanism inculcated control.” In both cases, the issue of control serves as a diaphanous cover for a strong undercurrent of behavior that transgresses institutionally imposed limits or, at least, bears the threat of such transgression.

However, acts of faith, which are central to the perpetuation of institutionalized religion, regardless of whether the religion is devotional, monastic, a state-sponsored cult, or a hereditary formalism, often take extreme forms that are permitted by the institution so long as they can be brought under theological, hence institutional, control. In other words, extreme behavior may not be regarded as unreasonably transgressive if it is accorded a peaceable and compliant place at the outer limits of theological or institutional normativity. Thus certain types of extreme behavior can be, and often are, theologically domesticated in order to neutralize any potential threat to institutional control. For example, glossalalia and āveśa are permitted, and sometimes encouraged, by dominant theological elites because they can be assigned an agreeable location in the theology and power structure of the religion. This structural positioning may seem at first glance forced or unnatural—after all, glossalalia and āveśa are uncomfortably close to the more transgressive and threatening specter of “devil worship” or physical violence such as self-impalement. Practitioners are empowered by the personal and social epiphanies that are components of glossalalia and āveśa, while priesthoods and theologians may be equally empowered so long as they are ceded final interpretative power and at least the illusion of overarching social control. In fact, the process is dialogical because it negotiates in both directions. Less privileged nonelite nonprofessionals poach on the discourse of privileged elite professionals by adopting their symbols and images, thus demarcating a realm of social and political safety for their experience, while the elites, the priesthoods, extend their domain by creating discourse mechanisms through which they domesticate popular practice. Indeed, as shown in culture after culture, elite participation in popular practice contributes to this negotiation between professionals and nonprofessionals.31

European Christianity, however, is unlike indigenous Indian religions in that it established more or less clear boundaries with respect to ecstatic experience, then strived to maintain them, at least in the periods immediately before and after the rise of Western colonialism. In order to understand the Protestant Christian, hence orientalist, attitudes toward possession in India (as well as other colonized territories), it is necessary to briefly summarize the Church’s position on possession on its home turf.32 Fortunately, we have Keith Thomas’s compendious Religion and the Decline of Magic to turn to for this.33 The devil was believed to be immanent, lying in wait to spread disease, crime, and havoc. “The belief in the reality of Satan not only stimulated allegations about diabolical compacts; it also made possible the idea of demoniacal possession.”34 Unusual or antisocial behavior, fits or convulsions, unconscious or unwitting blasphemy of the Church, and many other physical and moral ills were attributed to evil spirits sent by witches in league with the devil. “In seventeenth-century England, the epithets ‘possessed’ and ‘bewitched’ came very near to being synonymous.”35

The English Protestants viewed the practice of exorcism with considerable hostility, employing repressive actions to counter possession or bewitchment, including imprisonment or, in extreme cases in which a scapegoat was required, death.36 The Holy Spirit occupied an ambiguous place in the mainstream Church: To be possessed by the Holy Spirit was often intended metaphorically and was often at the outer limits of Protestant discourse.37 Beyond this, all other epiphanies were cordoned off, quite unlike the earlier Church, in which the limits were extremely elastic, at least in practice. Thus the dialogue between theological powerbrokers and representatives of popular movements broke down considerably earlier than was the case in India, and it was the deputies of the official power structure, in the form of missionaries, who came to India and attempted to impose their values on a phenomenological universe, which to them resembled the work of the devil. In view of this precedent for “othering,” it is not surprising that Western advocates of unorthodox intellectual and methodological positions, all to some degree rooted in the Reformation, should look so skeptically at emic assertions of possession that they too end up engaged in one or another type of othering. This othering is also assisted by the relative absence of a Christian framework for experiencing spirits, which “collapses them into a Christian demonic realm, which is much vaguer than spirits’ traditional classification.”38 In this case, as elsewhere in the colonial system, unfamiliarity bred contempt.39

To say that brahmanism or Christianity inculcate control is to say that the human desire and capacity for exotic empowering experience is kept within manageable, recognizable limits. In fact, however, is it actually the case that the elites whose discourse controls the “isms” also control the experience? This begs the complementary question: To what extent does more or less unsanctioned or barely sanctioned experience of the nonelite reshape the discourse of the “isms”? Both the anthropological and the Indological evidence suggest that when institutionally imposed limits are stretched, but not irreparably ruptured, these limits are usually modified, broadened by incumbent priesthoods and other elites in something of a tacit recognition that their control is comparatively thin, and often in name only. This interpretative strategy, which is not the property of anthropologists but of missionaries, is to be distinguished from the following perspectives in that it views possession as a religious problem, rather than as a medical, social, psychological, or existential problem.40
