+++
title = "06 Possession and Shamanism"

+++
Possession is often identified or compared to shamanism.115 The most important theorist of this relationship is I. M. Lewis, whose book Ecstatic Religion remains mandatory reading in the field. Lewis asserts that “possession is a culturally normative experience”116 in many places, a statement with which I concur with respect to South Asia. Like most anthropologists, he seeks to determine the social etiology and meaning of possession as well as its culturally determined psychological dimensions. He examines trance, ecstasy, hypnosis, and shamanism, ultimately concluding that the latter shares an important process with possession—a reciprocity between gods and humans. He posits a homogeneity between shamanism and spirit possession, arguing, contra Eliade, that “the Tungus evidence makes nonsense of the assumption that shamanism and spirit possession are totally different phenomena, belonging necessarily to different cosmological systems and to separate historical stages of development.”117 In drawing this equivalence, Lewis, whose model strikes me as excessively deterministic despite many virtues,118 delineates a wholly presumed and uncompromising functionalist sociology of possession states.119 In this he develops two contrasting psychosocial loci of possession, which he labels “central” and “peripheral.” Central possession, generally highly valued, supports prevailing political, moral, and religious beliefs and views spirits as sympathetic to these. Peripheral possession, an invasion of evil, amoral spirits, is undesirable and dangerous. Central possession, understandably, is a preserve of those of high status and power, while peripheral possession is generally associated with those who lack power and status. Although peripheral possession appears to be historically the preserve of women and those of lower social rank, it is definitively less so in recent times, as democratization, modernity, and the disappearance of Christian-dominated colonialism have freed educated middle- and even upper-class individuals and families to embrace the peripheries, bringing them closer to the center. In this way, economics, rather than ideology, caste, or other markers of purity or impurity, defines and situates power and status, at least in this orbit, by collapsing the boundaries between the periphery and the center.120

Gombrich critiques Lewis a decade and a half after Lewis’s first edition.

Possession is sometimes confused with shamanism; but in shamanism one’s spirit travels while one’s body remains unconscious, whereas in possession one’s body is temporarily inhabited by another spirit, while what happens to one’s own spirit at the time is left undetermined. This temporary loss of the sense of self is just like hysteria as clinically defined by Freud and Breuer. In India possession is mainly valued when it is practiced (perhaps one should rather say “undergone”) by specialists; they become possessed by non-human spirits, interact with an audience, and solve problems for clients.121

In order to bring some clarity to the much-abused term “shamanism,” especially as it is used by South Asianists with reference to possession, it is constructive to critique both Lewis and Gombrich. As to Gombrich: while we admit that he offers an adequate (though limited) critique of Lewis, he nevertheless misses the point that in India shamanism cannot be restricted to spirit travel while the body lies inert. In this, Gombrich adheres to the notion of possession offered by Eliade, that soul-journeys, rather than possession, are the definitive markers of the trance states characteristic of shamanism.122 This is also stated succinctly by Bourguignon, who distinguishes between shamanic trance and possession trance: “The [shamanic] trancer sees, hears, feels, perceives, and interacts with another; the possession trancer becomes another.”123 South Asianists, however, do not limit the use of shamanism to “soul-journeys”; indeed, in South Asia there is little evidence for this sort of shamanism.124 Obeyesekere largely agrees with Gombrich’s critique, though, in his study of the Pattini cult of Sri Lanka, he discusses a variety of possession states, not all of which can be described as sharing with shamanism the essential feature of reciprocity.125 These are cases of involuntary possession, usually symptomatic of disease or psychomental instability.

Another criticism of Lewis, at least from the South Asian standpoint, is that the terms “ecstasy” and “ecstatic,” as well as “central possession” and “peripheral possession,” are unproductive and misleading.126 Although Lewis is largely free from cultural biases, his characteristic terms “ecstasy” and “ecstatic” are drawn from Western theological discourse and cannot be applied unhesitatingly to South Asian possession accounts. At the beginning he defines ecstasy as “those transports of mystical exaltation in which man’s whole being seems to fuse in a glorious communion with the divinity.”127 He then equates this with the premodern Christian sense of “enthusiasm.” While this is surely one of the many senses that come under the category of possession states in South Asia, as we see below in reviewing possession in the Mahābhārata, bhakti, Tantra, and medical literature, it is by no means the only one. Through expanded attention to the lexical and linguistic presentation of possession states in South Asia, the present study hopes to set aright the misrepresentation of possession to which even a sensitive researcher, like Lewis, falls victim.

As for “central” and “peripheral” possession, I have no disagreement with Lewis’s distinction between possession states, and even spirits, that support prevailing political, moral, and religious beliefs, as well as other states (and spirits) that are undesirable and dangerous. The problem with his categories is that the terms “central” and “peripheral,” while valid, are of limited application in the South Asian context. Indeed, in South Asia, undesirable and dangerous states and spirits often support prevailing beliefs and moral orders as strongly as do benevolent ones. For example, folk possession in Nepal, Tamilnadu, and elsewhere is often violent, even dangerous, but in many ways it serves as the touchstone of certain deity cults, mediating between the individual and the prevailing social and religious orders.128 Truly malevolent possession is usually associated with physical and mental illness. But this, too, might not fit neatly into the category of peripheral, as it can also support prevailing morality and social systems, garnering participation across the social spectrum. I am not arguing that all possession in South Asia is central, rather that these terms should be used carefully.

Perhaps the most critiqued aspect of Lewis’s work is his association of possession with marginalized people, his “assumption that possession provides the powerless with a means to symbolically express social, economic, or political oppression.”129 Although many of the contexts of possession worldwide confirm this, the preponderance of the evidence in India bears this out only superficially. While no one can deny that power relations are an important factor in South Asian possession, the evidence from both classical and contemporary possession demonstrates that it is by no means the exclusive province of the powerless.

Shamanism broadly indicates manipulation of spirits, the usual process being the intentional, though ritually induced, introduction of a spirit into the shaman, which he or she then employs in a deliberate manner, generally for the benefit of others, often for curative purposes.130 In this seemingly physical entry, little if any distinction of category or function is made between spirit and deity; the shamanistic process is the same in either case. The shaman as spirit medium could as easily be the shaman as deity medium. One can say here that “the medium is the message,” that the shaman’s very presence, the empowering perception of his or her extraordinary gifts, is the most essential component of the shamanistic process. It is this that sets in motion the performative processes and their eventual fructification. Sergei Shirokogoroff lists five essential characteristics of a shaman (at least among the Tungus of Siberia): (1) a shaman is a master of spirits, who has (2) mastered a group of spirits; (3) a shaman commands a recognized array of techniques and paraphernalia that have been transmitted from elders; (4) s/he possesses a theoretical justification for the shamanistic process; (5) the shaman occupies a special social position.131 Whether spirit or deity, these five are repeatedly borne out in studies of South Asian spirit mediumship, which most often assumes the form of oracular possession. In other words, shamanism in South Asia takes the form of spirit mediumship and oracular possession. This is not to argue that all possession in South Asia is shamanistic (disease-producing possession is not, nor is destructive possession analogous to that of Nala by Kali in the Mahābhārata, and other forms of possession emanating from curses that one finds at exorcism sites such as Bālājī), or that the possession states that I describe from Sanskrit literature are shamanistic; it is simply to say that there are points of contact among such phenomena that must be distinguished.132

This technicality is important because shamanism has sometimes been limited to a specific mode of contact, in which the shaman ascends to the province of the gods or to chthonic realms in order to access special knowledge, which is subsequently transmitted to an enculturated and ritually constituted group. The innovation in South Asia, arising in no small measure from a widely distributed and more or less uniform devotional ethos, is that in oracular possession, gods descend into humans as an act of grace.133 Although the shaman may have invited the deity, the prevailing view is that in the final analysis it is often believed to be the deity that instigates the possession. While the shamanistic components of personal empowerment and acquisition of social status are neither lost nor ignored by either ethnographers or their informants, the latter invariably report that the primary value of possession and spirit mediumship is religious, that they are reciprocations of bhakti.

The late G.-D. Sontheimer, the well-known scholar of Maharashtrian folk culture, also understood possession as shamanic in a broad sense, when it was mediumistic, usually involving exorcism or healing.134 In his many essays on Khaṇḍobā, he consistently translated the Marathi word devṛṣi (variants: devṛṣi / devruṣi; Skt. devarṣi) as “shaman,” though he quickly adds that a “devṛṣi is not a shaman in the strict sense. There is no land of the dead into which the devṛṣi accompanies the dead, and no magical shamanic flight. The god ‘comes’ in order to take possession of the medium’s body and to speak to the Dhangars,”135 a shepherd caste whose members are possessed in this manner. Even if it is in a festival context where others may be in ecstatic possession brought on by devotion, the devṛṣi’s experience is qualitatively different. Although his possession (devṛṣis are all male) is brought on by devotional intensity, like that of others in ecstatic possession, it is also oracular or mediumistic and seemingly open to the same rational processes described by Nuckolls. “By entering into the body of the devṛṣī, he [the god śidobā] makes him into a ‘temple’ and enables him to diagnose others’ diseases, adversities, and so on, in the form of bhūta, and to recommend methods for remedying them.”136

Finally, Smriti Srinivas, who studied oracular possession among the Buddhists of Ladakh, recognizes its distant affinities with classical Siberian shamanism. Nevertheless, what she studied was also oracular possession, not journeys of the soul. Srinivas recognizes the terminological problem, the fuzzy understanding and application of different categories: “There is no unity of terminology—they may be called mediums, oracles, or shamans.”137 It is clear that most possession is not shamanic, strictu sensu, even when the term is used.138 In a statement summarizing studies of possession in Chinese religion—apposite for the state of affairs in South Asian studies—Jordan Paper writes: “The general tendency to refer to all ecstatic religious functionaries as shamans blurs functional differences”139 Thus it is more prudent to employ the distinction between spirit possession and spirit mediumship proposed by Peter Claus.

Spirit mediumship—the legitimate expected possession of a specialist by a spirit or a deity, usually for the purpose of the aid of the supernatural for human problems—is perhaps more common in certain parts of South India than in others. Spirit possession—which we may tentatively distinguish from the above as an unexpected, unwarranted intrusion of the supernatural into the lives of humans—is far more common than mediumship and far more widely distributed.140

This distinction is valuable for the current study, though, as seen below, there are many situations in which spirit possession is expected and warranted, but is not mediumistic or oracular.

As for the current study, much of what Lewis refers to is difficult to apply to the material found in Sanskrit texts. It is not possible to align either shamanic trance or ecstasy or social oppression with possession based on the evidence adduced here. Indeed, Lewis’s determinism is unproductive for the present purposes; he overtheorizes or makes his argument too extensive. The problem is the overdetermined nature of the discursive resources at his disposal: His theories all too easily circumscribe his evidence. It may be that the texts are hopelessly inadequate, but I believe that the evidence accumulated below demonstrates that only with great caution is it advisable to link possession (or ecstasy) with oppression and shamanism in premodern India. There is some evidence of mass possession cults in eastern India (i.e., greater Bengal) due to Mughal imperialism before British domination. This is alluded to in some of the Bengali maṅgalkābyas,141 but as far as I can see there is virtually no evidence for this before the Muslim period. It is possible, however, that the evidence I have presented here can reveal a sociology of possession that I have failed to retrieve.142
