+++
title = "10 Conclusions"

+++
After reviewing various definitions of possession, methodological approaches including those that study possession (1) as a negatively inspired religious phenomenon, (2) as a psychological event, (3) as a social or sociopolitical event that trades in power relations, (4) as a type of shamanism, and (5) as a “real” incursion of spirits or deities to be taken at face value and addressed with a full cosmological arsenal, and after examining possession as a gendered, situated, and performative experience, we are in a position to move forward in our study. As should be clear from the above remarks, I am not bound to any single methodological approach; indeed, I find all of them problematic, especially for a study that emerges for the most part from the literary record. Most of this record does not satisfy the requirements of thick description, as this was never the intention of the authors. Furthermore, possession as mentioned and described in India is exceptionally diverse in its perspectives and dates. Therefore, we cannot expect a unity of vision to emerge, nor a single methodological approach to work for all the material.

As a classicist and Sanskritist, it is my “natural” mode to resort to text-critical method. This is not, as some readers might suspect, a regressive or default tactic. The methods of Indology, following Lariviere, prove productive for this enterprise. However, I supplement this “natural” inclination with insights from other fields and do not hesitate to employ observations from comparative religion, ritual studies, and a variety of anthropological approaches if they help elucidate the material at hand. This is evident in the next two chapters, which, like the current chapter, deal with modern and contemporary phenomena.
