+++
title = "04 Questions and (a Few) Answers"

+++
In Chapter 2, I inquired as to what extent we can equate possession as discourse with possession as event. My answer(s) to this difficult question should have become clear in the course of this study. Essentially, the wealth of evidence both textual and ethnographic demonstrates that the link between discourse and event is so proximate that it is nearly indistinguishable. The discourse of possession in India is not just verbal or linguistic but performative as well. Possession is not just an inner experience defined by one’s intensity of feeling and focus, dissociative powers, and linguistic and performative capabilities; it is an event that is publicly negotiable and verifiable. Standards and paradigms of possession are available in South Asian public culture, both contemporary and ancient, and may be verified in the ethnographies and classical texts. The issue of discourse is closely tied in with the nature of individuality and the individual in South Asia and whether possession can contribute to a greater understanding or unveiling of that nature. I ask, in effect, whether a partially or fully manifested and attributed deity or spirit, within the locally constructed nexus of discourse and event, destroys the fabric of the individual. I have also wondered, apropos of these questions, whether it is a mistake to assume an autonomous individual in the first place.

Keeping in mind the four definitions of possession given in the first section of Chapter 2, I answer these questions by first noting that possession is a strategy or series of strategies employed for developing an interconnectivity of prescribed social and spirit(ual) universes (and discourses) with the improvisatory nature of fate, a method of coping with and examining the collision between the fixity of role and the randomness of life. Indeed, possession has always had an intriguing subversiveness that seeks to turn the mysteries of asymmetry and randomness to one’s advantage. What I’m suggesting is that possession reveals the individual to be so porous and indefinite that we must conclude that it is a tenuous social construction. This is not a unique or surprising conclusion in this day and age, when spirit and spiritual universes and discourses appear to be more isolated, disconnected, and inimical than ever before, and fate more improvisatory. Neither is this a negative assessment; it is, rather, an acknowledgment that possession is both self-affirming and radically transformative. As part of a socially sanctioned religious system, it affirms the social self while eclipsing the spiritually isolated self. The South Asian experience indicates that the disjunctions, isolations, or alienations that typify our lives emanate from collusions of moral and natural order, act and actor, person and collectivity, and everyday life and the realm of the transcendent, to adapt Appadurai’s ethnosociological observation cited above. In this disjunctive and disjointed world, possession is healing: It concentrates essences, entities, actors, and agents while bringing the above-mentioned polarities together experientially. In essence, the mutual impact of discourse and event forces us to acknowledge that we become more ourselves when we recognize that we are, in fact, less ourselves. This is the paradox of both oracular possession and the Indic concept of selfhood, stripped of its institutional veneer of brahman-ātman ideology.

By now we should be able to evaluate the sources that speak of possession in all its Sanskritic lexical incarnations and discern specific patterns of what is and is not included under this rubric. Possession is abundantly evident in the Ṛgveda and other early vedic texts. It is equally visible in certain Upaniṣads, the Mahābhārata, medical and tantric texts, fiction and didactic literature, bhakti texts, and passages scattered in systematized sastra. It is more difficult to discern in dharmasāstra and philosophical sūtras, though we have seen it in the Yogasūtras, Brahmasūtras, and the Madanamahārṇava. Both classical texts and modern ethnographies suggest that possession was common as a way of thinking in Indian culture and performance. It is perhaps no accident that possession, so noticeable in the Vedas and epics but sporadic in first-millennium canonical literature, surfaced widely in the realm of actual human experience, as the ethnographic literature attests. The local traditions, often derided by the educated elite in both India and the West for their nonvedic practices, are very possibly the most “vedic” of all Indian traditions. This may be said as well for the North Indian bhakti traditions, which are often local traditions repositioned in brahmanical settings. Before the Veda of the Mīmāṃsakas became the guiding light of orthodoxy and began to enjoin and shape human religious experience and concern from its own self-representation, a broad spectrum of religious experiences and concerns existed regionally and locally, as they do today, many of which might be recognizable in the Vedas but were later expunged from the vedic orthodoxy’s catalogue of central concerns.

This reflects a process that might be called “vernacularization,” in which elite traditions reach into local practice to keep themselves afloat. This would constitute the obverse of the oft-discussed “Sanskritization.” Sanskrit literature does not identify, at least in what I have been able to locate, a “vernacular” norm of ritual that keeps the Sanskrit performative ideologies alive. However, just as Sanskritization conferred prestige and legitimacy on local practices and traditions, vernacularization legitimated the Sanskritic enterprise by localizing it, which is to say by injecting elements of local culture into it. This is evident in the Ṛgveda, the Atharvaveda, the MBh, the Purāṇas, and the Tantras.42 Although I have not been able to find in Sanskrit literature the richness of detail that modern ethnographic description brings to bear on possession ritual—for example, Hiltebeitel’s observations on the “paraphernalia of possession,”43 in which he records the use of an ankle-bracelet rattle (cilampu), hourglass-shaped drum (uṭukkai), whip (viracātti), trident (vīrakuntam; Skt. triśūla) portable pennant (koṭicilai), firepost (akkiṉkampam; Skt. agniskambham), clay pot (karakam), and lemon-tipped sword in Draupadī cult possession in Tamilnadu—I expect that increased study of mid-second-millennium Tantras and tantric prayogas, most still in manuscript form (such as those discussed in Chapter 11), will uncover more of this. Returning to Lariviere’s point discussed in Chapter 1, it is not so much that better critical editions of well-known texts are crucial in revealing a more accurate picture of the lives of subalterns, as if brahmans systematically exorcised such material from their texts (which I do not believe they did). Rather, the more important enterprise is examining manuscripts that may be unclassified by the orthodoxy among both Western-style scholars and sāstraically oriented paṇḍitas. This territory remains surprisingly uncharted. The sorts of issues that Davidson has dealt with in his study of esoteric Buddhism and I have addressed in Chapter 11 may be replicated or enhanced through attending to such unstudied texts and ritual ephemera.

It is often said that Christ would not recognize or approve of Christianity as it is practiced today. Similarly, the vedic seers would probably be more at home with any one of a number of devotional and ecstatic sects that arose in India than with the philosophically rigorous and repressive orthodoxies that were established in their name.44 These devotional and ecstatic sects find common ground with the Vedas in their appeal to the viability, safety, and sanctity of individual experience; what they subvert is the institutional authority of the Vedas. Jack Miles, a biographer of Jesus, writes, with reference to American Christianity, that “the social viability of religion for the many depends significantly on the intellectual viability of religion for the few.”45 This statement finds resonance with religion in ancient and classical India. The supposition of the intellectual and religious elite that an ounce of theology is sufficient to legitimize or spawn a pound of popular movements certainly has merit, but it may not be as true as the reverse: that broadly based and socially viable religious movements force on an orthodoxy an additional, and often awkwardly integrated, ounce of theology. As vedic orthodoxies recast themselves as Purāṇic or tantric, they were forced to support the legitimacy of deity and spirit possession, at least in practice. But this support was indirect; it occurred in the interstices and at the margins, through absorption and consequent prescription, rather than through argument. Thus, it appears to have been an effort of liberals among the orthodox to remain on the cutting edge of popular culture through ontological outreach even if they rarely extended enough epistemological rope to draw the fringes into mainstream Sanskritic philosophical systems. In short, orthodoxy in India has a history of finding ways to accommodate, express, and sanction that which is outside what is normally orthodox as well as that which is orthodox in the extreme, in this case the recognition and validation of forms of possession.

In sum, it is highly inadvisable to essentialize the phenomenon of possession. As the foregoing discussion demonstrates, possession in South Asia is not just one thing. Amid this shifting ground, however, we can with some certainty assert the following.

1. Whatever may have been the origins of possession in India—it would be fruitless and incorrect to posit its origin in a single event, locality, or religious complex—it has become perhaps the region’s most wide-spread form of spiritual expression, with a vibrant presence in semi-public divinatory practice and public festival.
2. Possession is sharply divided between positive oracular possession and negative disease-producing possession. The two have occasionally converged, as literary and ethnographic evidence over several millennia amply testifies.
3. Both positive and negative possession are commonly believed to have a moral source. In the case of negative possession, the “mistake” might occur unwittingly. Negative possession is attributed to pollution, contact with evil or degraded people, or being unprotected while in terrifying environments (such as burning grounds or deep jungle). More generally, it is believed that women and children, who are regarded as weaker than men, are more susceptible to possession. Positive possession, by contrast, may be attributed to virtuous action (including action from past births), successful devotional practice, properly performed ritual, or divine grace.
4. Possession cannot be reduced to a single descriptive prototype, but is a complex phenomenon characterized by terms that convey broad semantic possibilities. These can be distinguished through close linguistic study.
5. Possession is always to some extent disruptive and almost always in some sense violent. The disruptiveness occurs in every form of possession, from ecstatic initiatory possession to oracular possession to disease-producing possession. The violence is often expressed as rage (raudra). On occasion, however, possession can be peaceful (śānta).
6. Acceptance of the ontological and substantive reality of spirits and deities has always been widespread in South Asia, as it has been in most societies in which the dominant scientific paradigm(s) differ from the one developed and accepted in the West since the Renaissance (hence, the stance of Western scholarship toward the subject). Thus, the South Asian literary and psychological universe has always been inhabited by innumerable spirits and deities. In spite of occasional orthodox efforts to excise possession from mainstream discourse, it is inevitable that a belief so widespread would find its way into Sanskrit texts.
7. Possession has a strong horizontal and vertical presence in Indian society. Although it has a vigorous presence in women’s religion, it is by no means limited to women or to members of any particular class or caste, linguistic grouping, or economic stratum.
8. Possession in South Asia is so varied, multivocal, and ubiquitous—it arises as a result of a large number of possible physical, mental, social, moral, and psychological circumstances—that it is inadvisable to offer a grand theory of possession, in spite of certain consistencies in its narrative logic.
