+++
title = "02 ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ"

+++





The goddess Śrī, who is also commonly known by the name Lakṣmī, has been known in the Hindu tradition since pre-Buddhist times. She is one of the most popular goddesses in the Hindu pantheon. She has a considerable body of mythology and is widely worshiped by Hindus of all castes throughout India to this day. Since the late epic period \(ca. A.D. 400\) she has been particularly associated with the god Viṣṇu as his wife or consort. In this role she plays the part of a model Hindu wife, obediently serving her husband as lord. Throughout her history Śrī has been associated with prosperity, well-being, royal power, and illustriousness. In many respects she is the embodiment of these qualities, and it is commonly understood that when these qualities are evident, Śrī herself is present or reveals herself.

## THE EARLY HISTORY OF ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ

The goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī does not appear in the earliest Vedic literature.1 The term *śrī*, however, does occur quite often, and it is clear that the meanings of the term are related to the nature of the later goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī. As used in the Vedic hymns the term *śrī* suggests capability, power, and advantageous skills. As an external quality *śrī* suggests beauty, luster, glory, and high rank. The term is especially used in later Vedic literature to refer to the ruling power, dominion, and majesty of kings. As such it seems to be a distinct, disembodied power that is acquired by kings in various ways. It seems to be a power associated more with the office of the king than with the king himself. At one point *śrī* is identified with the cushion upon which the king sits. The idea is that the cushion or seat, *sri,* ruling power, is temporarily possessed by the current owner of the seat.2 *Śrī* also refers to riches, prosperity, and abundance in general. In that sense it is something that may be acquired or possessed by anyone. In short, *śrī* refers to most auspicious qualities and suggests general well-being in terms of physical health, material prosperity, bodily beauty, and ruling majesty.

In what may be the earliest myth that speaks of Śrī as a goddess, she is the personification or embodiment of auspicious, particularly royal, qualities.3 She is born as a result of the austerities of Prajāpati. Seeing Śrī, the other gods covet her qualities and proceed to steal them from her. Ten qualities, or objects, are listed: food, royal power, universal sovereignty, noble rank, power, holy luster, kingdom, fortune, bounteousness, and beauty.4 In Vedic literature, then, the goddess Śrī’s origin seems to be the result of the personification of auspicious qualities, particularly those associated with royal power and riches.

The most detailed picture of Śrī-Lakṣmī in Vedic literature is found in the *Śrī-sūkta,* a hymn in praise of Sri which is part of an appendix to the *Ṛg-veda* and which is probably pre-Buddhist in date.5 This is surely one of the earliest hymns to Śrī and associates her with certain symbols and qualities that persist throughout her history in the Hindu tradition. Not surprisingly, and in conformity with the meanings of the term *śrī* in early Vedic literature, Śrī is invoked to bring fame and prosperity \(verse 7\). She is said to be bountiful and to give abundance \(5\). She is said to bestow on her worshiper gold \(14\), cattle, horses \(1\), and food \(10\). She is asked to banish her sister Alakṣmī, “misfortune” \(5, 6, 8\), who appears in such inauspicious forms as need, poverty, hunger, and thirst \(8\). Royal qualities are suggested when she is described as seated in the middle of a chariot, possessed of the best horses, and delighted by the sounds of elephants \(3\). In outward appearance she is glorious and richly ornamented. She is radiant as gold, illustrious like the moon, and wears a necklace of gold and silver \(1\). She is often said to shine like the sun \(6, 13\) and to be lustrous like fire \(4\).

An important feature of Śrī in this hymn is her association with fertility, a feature that was not significantly emphasized in earlier usages of the term *śrī* in Vedic literature. In the *Śrī-sūkta* she is described as moist \(13, 14\), perceptible through odor \(9\), abundant in harvest, and dwelling in cow dung \(9\). Her son is said to be Kardama, which means mud, mire, or slime \(11\). Clearly, Śrī is associated with growth and the fecundity of moist, rich soil. Her presence is affirmed to be discernible in the mysterious potency of the earth. Although Śrī’s association with agricultural fertility does not play a central role in her later literary history in Hinduism, this aspect of Śrī remains important to this day at the village level. Villagers, particularly women, are reported to worship Śrī in the form of cow dung on certain occasions, and this form of worship is actually enjoined in the *Nilamata-purāṇa*.6

The hymn to Śrī also mentions two objects that come to be consistently associated with Srī throughout her history: the lotus and the elephant. She is seated on a lotus, is the color of a lotus \(4\), appears like a lotus \(5\), is covered with lotuses, and wears a garland of lotuses \(14\). Throughout her history, in fact, Śrī-Lakṣmī is often called Padmā and Kamala, “lotus.” The popularity of the lotus in Indian art and iconography, both Buddhist and Hindu, suggests a complex and multivalent meaning associated with the lotus.

As expressive of Śrī-Lakṣmī’s nature two general meanings seem apparent. First, the lotus is a symbol of fertility and life which is rooted in and takes its strength from the primordial waters.7 The lotus symbolizes vegetative growth that has distilled the life-giving power of the waters into embodied life.8 The lotus, and the goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī by association, represents the fully developed blossoming of organic life. At the macrocosmic level the lotus might be taken as a symbol of the entire created world. The lotus growing from the navel of Viṣṇu marks the beginning of a new cosmic creation. The frequent use of the lotus in Tantric *maṇḍalas* also points to the lotus as a symbol of the entire created universe.9 The lotus suggests a growing, expanding world imbued with vigorous fertile power. It is this power that is revealed in Śrī-Lakṣmī. She is the nectar \(the *rasa\)* of creation which lends to creation its distinctive flavor and beauty. Organic life, impelled as it is by this mysterious power, flowers richly and beautifully in the creative processes of the world.

The second meaning of the lotus in relation to Śrī-Lakṣmī refers to purity and spiritual power. Rooted in the mud but blossoming above the water, completely uncontaminated by the mud, the lotus represents spiritual perfection and authority. A common motif in Hindu and Buddhist iconography is the lotus seat. The gods and goddesses, the buddhas and bodhisattvas, typically sit or stand upon a lotus, which suggests their spiritual authority. To be seated upon or to be otherwise associated with the lotus suggests that the being in question—god, buddha, or human being—has transcended the limitations of the finite world \(the mud of existence, as it were\) and floats freely in a sphere of purity and spirituality. Śrī-Lakṣmī thus suggests more than the fertilizing powers of moist soil and the mysterious powers of growth. She suggests a perfection or state of refinement that transcends the material world. She is associated not only with royal authority but with spiritual authority as well and she combines royal and priestly powers in her presence.

One of the most popular and enduring representations of Śrī-Lakṣmī shows her flanked by two elephants in the so-called Gaja-Lakṣmī images. The elephants shower her with water from their trunks or empty pots of water over her.10 The elephants seem to have two related meanings. First, they most likely represent fertilizing rains. An ancient Hindu tradition says that the first elephants had wings and flew about the sky. In fact, they were clouds and showered the earth with rain wherever they went. These sky elephants, however, were cursed by a sage when they landed on a tree under which he was meditating and broke his concentration. Stripped of their wings, they henceforth had to remain earth-bound. But these earth elephants are still regarded as cousins of clouds, and their presence is supposed to attract their “white cousins,” who bring fertilizing rains with them.11 The flanking, showering elephants in images of Śrī-Lakṣmī reinforce one of the principal themes that we have already noted in her nature, her association with the fertility of crops and the sap of existence. Where Lakṣmī is, there elephants are, and where elephants are, there is produced the fertilizing potency of rain.

Second, elephants suggest royal authority. Kings in ancient India kept stables of elephants, which formed their heavy artillery in military campaigns. Kings often traveled on elephants in ceremonial processions, and in general elephants were considered an important indication of royal authority. Kings in ancient India were also believed to be responsible for rain and the fertility of the crops.12 To ensure the kings’ beneficial influence, it was probably important for them to keep several elephants for their power to bring fertilizing rains. In the king and the elephant, then, are brought together two central themes in the imagery of Śrī-Lakṣmī, royal authority and fertility.

Images of Śrī with elephants are probably meant to portray the act of royal consecration. The central ritual action of the Vedic royal-consecration ceremony, the Rājasūya, was the *abhiṣekha* ritual, in which the king was consecrated by having auspicious waters poured over him to bestow authority and vigor on him.13 Insofar as the elephants in these images of Lakṣmī may be understood to be portraying the *abhiṣekha,* they bestow the qualities of fertility and royal authority on Lakṣmi, herself the source of these very qualities.14 The elephants, furthermore, are often shown standing on lotuses,15 the preeminent symbol of Lakṣmī. The elephants thus imbue Lakṣmī with those very qualities that she possesses to the highest degree, and she in turn infuses the elephants with the same qualities. A more highly charged image denoting the increase of royal authority, fertility, and vigor would be difficult to imagine.16

## ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ IN LATER HINDUISM

In the course of her history Śrī-Lakṣmī has been associated with male deities, each of whom is significant in suggesting characteristics of the goddess. Some texts associate her with the god Soma. Srī-Lakṣmī, along with several other deities, attends Soma after he performs a great royal sacrifice.17 The association of Lakṣmī with Soma is noteworthy for two reasons. First, in attending him after he has assumed the position of royal authority, she demonstrates one of her main characteristics, that of bestowing royal authority or being present where royal authority exists. Second, Soma is well known as the lord of plants and is often identified with the fertile sap that underlies vegetative growth. It is fitting that Śrī-Lakṣmī, who is similarly identified, should be associated with Soma in these texts. They complement and reinforce each other as symbols of the sap of existence.

A few texts say that Lakṣmī is the wife of Dharma. She and several other goddesses, all of whom are personifications of certain auspicious qualities, were given to Dharma in marriage by her father, Dakṣa. This association seems primarily to represent a thinly disguised “wedding” of Dharma \(virtuous conduct\) with Śrī-Lakṣmī \(prosperity and well-being\). The point of the association seems to be to teach that by performing dharma one obtains prosperity.18

A more interesting and fully developed association is between Śrī and the god Indra.19 Several myths relate the theme of Indra’s losing, acquiring, or being restored to the boon of Śrī-Lakṣmī’s presence. In these myths it is clear that what is lost, acquired, or restored in the person of Śrī is royal authority and power. Indra is traditionally known as the king of the gods, the foremost of the gods, and he is typically described as a heavenly king. It is therefore appropriate for Śrī to be associated with him as his wife or consort. In these myths Śrī-Lakṣmī appears as the embodiment of royal authority, as a being whose presence is essential for the effective wielding of royal power and the creation of royal prosperity.

Several myths of this genre describe Śrī-Lakṣmī as being persuaded to leave one ruler for another. She is said, for example, to dwell with the demons Bali and Prahlāda. While she dwells with these demons they are demons in name only. Under her gracious presence they rule their kingdoms righteously, society operates smoothly, the lands are fertile, and the demon kings themselves shimmer with sublime inner and outer qualities. When she leaves Prahlāda, at Indra’s request, the demon loses his luster and fears for his well-being.20 Along with Sri, the following qualities depart from Prahlāda: good conduct, virtuous behavior, truth, activity, and strength. With Śrī’s departure, Prahlāda is left emptied of his royal might and his predilections toward virtuous conduct.



Śrī-Lakṣmī. Pratapaditya Pal, *Indo-Asian Art from the John Gilmore Ford Collection* \(Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1971\), fig. 19. Reprinted by permission of the Walters Art Gallery.

The myths concerning the demon Bali make clear the same association between Lakṣmī and victorious kings. In these myths Bali defeats Indra. Lakṣmī is attracted to Bali’s winning ways and bravery and joins him, along with her attendant auspicious virtues. In association with the auspicious goddess, Bali rules the three worlds with virtue, and under his rule the three worlds prosper.21 Only when Viṣṇu, at the request of the dethroned gods, tricks Bali into surrendering the three worlds does Śrī-Lakṣmī depart from Bali, leaving him lusterless and powerless.

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s presence ensures a king more than ruling power. One of the myths associating her with Indra tells us that when she sat down next to Indra he began to pour down rain and the crops grew abundantly. Cows gave plenty of milk, all beings enjoyed prosperity, and the earth flourished.22 Indra is associated with fertility in Vedic texts, and well into the medieval period festivals celebrated in his honor associated him with the fertility of the crops. From the earliest Vedic texts he is described as wielding the *vajra* \(the thunderbolt\) as his favorite weapon, and to the present day he is associated with bringing rain. As a couple, Śrī-Lakṣmī and Indra are a clear example of a common type of divine pair in the world’s religions: a female earth goddess and a male sky/rain god. Together they combine to generate the fertility that is necessary to all life. In the *Vedas* the deities Dyaus and Pṛthivī are a good example of this type of divine pair and the reciprocal roles they play in generating and sustaining life. Śrī-Lakṣmī in association with Indra seems to represent a later version of the Dyaus-Pṛthivī couple. In this symbiotic relationship the male deity, associated with the sky, is said to fertilize the female deity with his rain. Indra also seems to have had phallic associations in his identification with the plow, and it seems appropriate that he would become associated with a goddess representing the fertile earth.23

Some traditions also associate Śrī-Lakṣmī with the god Kubera. Kubera is lord of the Yakṣas, a race of supernatural beings who in general frequent forests and uncivilized areas, and he is in particular the possessor and distributor of wealth. He is the possessor and guardian of the earth’s treasures in the form of gems. Śrī’s relationship to Kubera is appropriate insofar as each of them is preeminently associated with prosperity and wealth.24 Where wealth and abundance are, one or the other deity, and probably both, is certain to be found. So the two deities become associated as a couple.25 Śrī’s identification through Kubera with the Yaksas, in addition, emphasizes her identity with the mysterious powers of growth and fertility.26 Yaksas often play the part of fertility symbols in Indian art and generally are associated iconographically with trees, vines, and vegetative growth. They are often shown embracing trees, leaning against trees,27 or pouring forth vegetation from their mouths or navels.28 The identification of Śrī-Lakṣmī, the goddess who embodies the potent power of growth, with the Yakṣas is natural. She, like them, involves herself and reveals herself in the irrepressible fecundity of plant life.

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with so many different male deities and with the notorious fleetingness of good fortune earned her a reputation for fickleness and inconstancy.29 In one text she is said to be so unsteady that even in a picture she moves and that if she associates with Viṣṇu it is only because she is attracted to his many different forms \(*avatāras*\).30 By the late epic period \(ca. A.D. 400\), however, Śrī-Laksmī becomes consistently and almost exclusively associated with Viṣṇu; as his wife she becomes characterized by steadfastness.31 It is as if in Viṣṇu she has finally found the god she was looking for and, having found him, has remained loyal to him ever since.

Mythologically Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu comes about in the context of the churning of the milk ocean by the gods and demons, who seek the elixir of immortality \(*amṛta*\). Lakṣmī does not figure at all in some versions of this story,32 but in others she is the central focus of the myth.33 What seems clear is that a myth concerning the churning of the ocean to obtain various valuable things existed from ancient times in India and that at some point Lakṣmī’s origin was felt to be related to this mythological event. The interesting question is why Lakṣmī’s origin makes sense in the context of this myth and how her association with Viṣṇu comes about in later versions of the myth.

An ancient Indian tradition asserts that creation proceeds from an infinite body of primordial water, that the world or the multitude of universes of later Hinduism ultimately arises from and rests upon this limitless expanse of waters. In its unrefined state this watery world is chaotic, or at least formless and overwhelming. Creation, or ordered existence, only takes place when this watery mass is somehow agitated, processed, or refined in such a way that form and growth take place. Within the watery formlessness resides the potency or essence of life, *rasa, amṛta,* or *soma.* When this potency is released by the primordial waters, creation can proceed.34 The churning of the ocean by the gods and demons is intended to obtain the nectar of immortality, the essence of creative power that will make the churners immortal and grant them their status as ordainers and overseers of creation. The act of churning dramatically illustrates the process of distilling the essence of the primordial waters. By churning milk one thickens and refines it until it yields a richer substance—butter. Similarly, the milk ocean when churned yields valuable essences, among them, in most later versions of the myth, the goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī.

The role or place of Srī-Lakṣmī in this myth of creation seems fairly clear. Although the nectar of immortality is described as a separate entity that arises from the churning of the ocean, Śrī-Lakṣmī has many and obvious associations with the sap of existence that underlies or pervades all plant and animal life. She herself represents the miraculous transformation of the formless waters into organic life.35 The extent to which Śrī-Lakṣmī is necessary to the ongoing created order, and hence may be identified or associated with the essence of the creation, is indicated in some later variants of the myth. These versions tell us that Śrī-Lakṣmī disappears from the three worlds when Indra insults her. As a result, all sacrifices cease to be performed, all austerities are discontinued by the sages, all generosity ends, the sun and moon lose their brilliance, the gods lose their strength, and fire loses its heat.36 In the absence of the goddess the worlds become dull and lusterless and begin to wither away. When she returns, the worlds again regain their vitality, and the society of humans and the order of the gods regain their sense of purpose and duty.

Most variants of the myth say that Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu took place at the churning of the ocean. The relationship of Śrī and Viṣṇu seems appropriate in the context of the myth and at a general symbolic level in several ways. During her early history Śrī’s attraction to powerful rulers among the gods \(and demons\) was firmly established. In the churning-of-the-ocean myth Viṣṇu is clearly the dominant god. He oversees the entire operation and actually makes the churning possible by providing two indispensable participants: Vāsuki, the cosmic serpent who is used as the churning rope, and the cosmic tortoise, upon which the churning stick rests. Furthermore, both Vāsuki and the tortoise are actually forms of Viṣṇu himself. When Śrī comes forth from the ocean, she is naturally attracted to Viṣṇu, the god who is obviously superior to the others. Conversely, Viṣṇu, as the divine overseer of the event, is the natural recipient of the treasures that result from the churning. As the master of ceremonies, Viṣṇu is entitled to the lovely goddess who emerges as a result of the efforts of the gods and demons.

Viṣṇu’s royal nature is also significant in Śrī’s association with him. By the medieval period \(fifth through thirteenth century A.D.\) Viṣṇu is considered the divine king par excellence. He is described as dwelling in a heavenly court, Vaikuṇṭha, and he is depicted iconographically as a mighty king. His primary role as king is to institute and maintain dharmic order. This he does by means of his various *avatāras*, who intervene in the world from time to time to combat the forces of disorder. Viṣṇu, however, is also present wherever righteous kings rule and maintain order. He maintains order on the earth, that is, through certain human agents, namely, righteous kings.37 We noted earlier that kings cannot rule without the authority that is bestowed by Śrī. Where she is present, royal authority waxes strong. Where she is absent, would-be rulers become weak and ineffectual. The association of Śrī with Viṣṇu, the supreme divine king, as her husband is therefore fitting. She follows him when he becomes part of his human agents—the righteous kings—and she bestows on these kings her royal power, prosperity, and fertility. In effect Viṣṇu designates his human agents, and Śrī then empowers them, enabling them to be effective maintainers of Viṣṇu’s cosmic scheme.

As Viṣṇu’s wife, Lakṣmī loses her fickle nature. As the great cosmic king’s queen she is depicted as a model Hindu wife, loyal and submissive to her husband. One of her most popular iconographic depictions shows her kneeling before Viṣṇu to massage his feet.38 In her early history Śrī-Lakṣmī was strongly associated with growth and fecundity as manifested in vegetation. A teeming vitality animated her presence, a power that gave birth inexhaustibly to life. In her association with Viṣṇu her character seems more restrained. Although she does not lose her association with fertility and growth, she seems more clearly involved in or revealed in the order of dharma that her husband creates and oversees. When Viṣṇu assumes his various *avatāras* in order to uphold dharma, she incarnates herself as his helpmate, assuming an appropriate form as his spouse or consort. She thus assists and accompanies him in his world-maintaining role. The *Viṣṇu-purāṅa* says:



. . . as Hari descends in the world in various shapes—so does his consort Śrī. Thus when Hari was born as a dwarf, as a son of Aditi, Lakṣmī appeared from a lotus; . . . when he was Rāghava, she was Sītā, and when he was Kṛṣṇa, she became Rukminī. In the other descents of Viṣṇu, she is his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Viṣṇu to put on. \(1.9.142–146\)39

Her role as a model wife typifies her more subdued nature. She is occupied in this role with household order. Indeed, she is said to cook food at the Jagannātha temple for those who come for *prasād.40* In her role as an ideal wife she exemplifies the orderliness of human society and human relations. Iconographic representations of Viṣṇu and Śrī together typically show her as subservient to Viṣṇu, which is in harmony with sexual roles as described in the *Dharma-śāstras.* She is usually shown as considerably smaller than Viṣṇu and as having only two arms instead of the four arms that she usually has when shown alone. Her submissive position is nicely conveyed in an image of the divine pair from Bādāmī in which Viṣṇu sits on a high stool while Lakṣmī sits on the ground and leans on him, her right hand placed on his knee.41

Reflecting her increasing association with social order, several texts locate Lakṣmī’s presence in righteous behavior, orderly conduct, and correct social observance. She is said, for example, to live with those who tell the truth and are generous.42 She dwells with those who have clean bodies and are well dressed,43 who eat with moderation, who have intercourse with their wives on a regular basis \(something prescribed in the Hindu law books\), and who cover themselves when asleep.44 In the *Mahābhīrata* she says: “I dwell in truth, gift, vow, austerity, strength and virtue” \(12.218.12\). Orderly social relations and traditional social virtues attract Śrī-Lakṣmī, herself a model of social decorum as Viṣṇu’s wife.

In association with Viṣṇu, Lakṣmī provides a picture of marital contentment, domestic order, and satisfying cooperation and beneficial interdependence between male and female. Most iconographic representations picture the pair as a smiling, happy couple; they are often shown touching each other intimately. In images of the Lakśmī-Nārāyaṇa type, Lakśmī is usually depicted seated on Viṣṇu’s left thigh. Her right hand is around his neck while his left arm encircles her waist.45 Sometimes the two are shown holding hands,46 and it is not unusual for them to be shown gazing into each other’s eyes.

The intimacy of the two, indeed, their underlying unity, is dramatically shown in images in which they are merged into one bisexual figure, Viṣṇu constituting the right half of the figure and Lakṣmī the left.47 The interdependence of the two is the subject of a long passage in the *Viṣṇu-purāṇa.* There Viṣṇu is said to be speech and Lakṣmī meaning; he is understanding, she is intellect; he is the creator, she is the creation; she is the earth, he the support of the earth; she is a creeping vine, he is the tree to which she clings; he is one with all males, and she is one with all females; he is love, and she is pleasure \(1.8.15 ff.\).48

## ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ IN THE PĀÑCARĀTRA AND ŚRĪ VAIṢṆAVA SCHOOLS

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu eventually leads to her playing important roles in the mythological and philosophic visions of the Pāñcarātra and Śrī Vaiṣṇava schools of thought and devotion. In the Pāñcarātra school Lakṣmī comes to play the central role in the creation and evolution of the universe as the *śakti* of Viṣṇu. In the Pāñcarātra creation scenario Viṣṇu remains almost entirely inactive, relegating the creative process to Lakṣmī. After awakening Lakṣmī at the end of the night of dissolution, Viṣṇu’s role in the creation of the universe is restricted to that of an inactive architect whose plan is put into effect by a builder. Lakṣmī alone acts, and the impression throughout the cosmogony is that she acts independently of Viṣṇu, although it is stated that she acts according to his wishes.49

The practical effect of Viṣṇu’s inactive role in creation is that he becomes so aloof that Lakṣmī dominates the entire Pāñcarātra vision of the divine. In effect she acquires the position of the supreme divine principle, the underlying reality upon which all rests, that which pervades all creation with vitality, will, and consciousness. The *Lakṣmī-tantra,* a popular Pāñcarātra text, says that Lakṣmī undertakes the entire stupendous creation of the universe with only a one-billionth fraction of herself \(14.3\). So transcendent is she, so beyond the ability of the mind to circumscribe her, that only a miniscule fraction of her is manifest in the creation of the universe. Elsewhere in the same text she describes herself as follows:



Inherent in the \(principle of\) existence, whether manifested or unmanifested, I am at all times the inciter \(potential element of all things\). I manifest myself \(as the creation\), I ultimately dissolve myself \(at the time of destruction\) and I occupy myself with activity \(when creation starts functioning\).

I alone send \(the creation\) forth and \(again\) destroy it. I absolve the sins of the good. As the \(mother\) earth towards all beings, I pardon them \(all their sins\). I mete everything out. I am the thinking process and I am contained in everything. \(50.65.67\)50

Functionally Lakṣmī has taken over the cosmic functions of the three great male gods of the Hindu pantheon: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. In the Pāñcarātra vision, by creating, sustaining, and periodically destroying the universe, she completely dominates the divine, mythological landscape. She also occupies the central position as the object of devotion, the dispenser of grace, and the final bestower of liberation \(50.131–132\). Throughout the *Lakṣmī-tantra* it is she, not Viṣṇu, who is described as the object of devotion, the one who grants all desires and whose special mantra embodies salvific power. It is she, not Viṣṇu, whose form is described in detail and presented as the supreme object of meditation.51

Although Lakṣmī has been elevated functionally to a position of supreme divinity in the Pāñcarātra school and has been identified with various philosophic absolutes, she retains her nature as the goddess who both imbues creatures with illustriousness and well-being and pervades the creation as the sap of existence. At one point in the *Lakṣmī-tantra,* for example, she says of herself: “Like the fat that keeps a lamp burning I lubricate the senses of living beings with my own sap of consciousness” \(50.110\). Elsewhere she is said to be *prakṛti* \(50.64, 96\), the principle of nature in Hinduism which spontaneously creates all material reality. *Prakṛti* is the creation’s dynamic aspect, which tends toward multiplication, diversification, and specificity.52 It is an active, fertile principle that is similar to the sap of existence with which Lakṣmī is identified during her early history. Laksml’s identification throughout the Pancaratra system with Viṣṇu’s *śakti* is also a way of declaring her association with fertile power. Although the idea of *śakti* is somewhat more refined and inorganic than *rasa, soma, amrta,* or the powers of fertility, *sakti* does suggest unambiguously the idea of vigorous, dynamic power associated with life and growth. Despite her promotion, therefore, it is clear that Lakṣmī retains her essential character as a dynamic, positive force that underlies growth, fertility, and prosperity.

A central presupposition in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism is that Viṣṇu, the supreme deity for this school, is always accompanied by, attended by, or otherwise associated with his consort Śrī. But Śrī does not play the central cosmological role as she does in the Pāñcarātra school. In Śrī Vaiṣṇavism Viṣṇu is clearly the central actor on the mythological stage and is equated with the highest philosophic principles. Śrī-Lakṣmī has nevertheless acquired an important role among certain Śrī Vaiṣṇava theologicians as the mediator between Viṣṇu and his devotees.53

The central aim of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava devotee is to cultivate and perfect his inherent duty, which is to love his Lord, and in so loving his Lord to identify himself with God as closely as possible. The writings of some philosophers of the school say that in approaching the Lord and requesting purity and grace Lakṣmī acts as a mediating presence between the devotee and Viṣṇu. For Vedānta Desika \(A.D. 1268–1368\) Lakṣmī seems indispensable in approaching Viṣṇu. She is described in his writings as a gracious mother who willingly intervenes with her often-stern husband on the devotee’s behalf. “O Mother who resides on the lotus, hearken to my plea\! I babble like a child; with your grace \(*prasāda*\) make the Lord who is your beloved listen to my \[petition\].”54 Elsewhere he writes: “The mother . . . , whose nature is such that her grace is unmixed with any anger and is showered on all, does not spare any effort to make the punishing Lord be pleased with those who have committed several faults. She cools the heat of His anger, which arises because He is the father.”55

Other Śrī Vaiṣṇava theologians share this view of Śrī as an intermediary between the sinful devotee and Viṣṇu. Periyāvaccān Pillai \(b. 1228\) describes a conversation between Śrī and Viṣṇu in which Śrī acts as a devotee’s advocate. Viṣṇu speaks first: “‘Since beginningless time this human has been disobeying my laws and has been the object of my anger. If I condone his faults and accept them patiently, instead of punishing him, I will be disregarding the injunctions of *śastra.*’ Śrī replies: ‘But if you punish the human, instead of saving him, your quality of grace will not survive.’”56 In this passage Śrī takes the side of the devotee by arguing that if Viṣṇu does not save the sinner his reputation as merciful will be threatened. Her argument plays on Viṣṇu’s own conception of himself. Elsewhere Śrī is said to resort to distracting Viṣṇu from his intention to punish a devotee by enticing him with her beauty. Maṇavāḷa Māmunikal \(1370–1443\) says of Śrī: “She uses her beauty to entice and enslave \[the Lord\]. She makes eyes at Him, she lets her dress slip down a little.”57

In Śrī Vaiṣṇavism Śrī embodies divine compassion. While Viṣṇu, as the mighty king of heavenly Vaikuṇṭha, may seem so awesome and transcendent as to be all but unapproachable to the lowly devotee, Śrī provides an aspect of the divine that is eminently approachable. In this role as mediator she considerably softens the Śrī Vaiṣṇava vision of the divine and allows feelings of intimacy and warmth to pervade the devotee’s devotional moods toward the divine.

It should be noted that in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism the goddess is still renowned for bestowing all good things. Indeed, she is sovereignty.58 It is fitting that as the mediator between Viṣṇu and the devotee she bestows on the devotee the most cherished of all boons, her husband’s grace.

## THE WORSHIP OF ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ

Śrī-Lakṣmī is today one of the most popular and widely venerated deities of the Hindu pantheon. Her auspicious nature and her reputation for granting fertility, luck, wealth, and well-being seem to attract devotees in every Indian village. “All of India’s back country is the dominion of Lakṣmī, the goddess of the lotus. . . . She accompanies every mile traveled through central India, every visit to a temple. . . . Her likenesses are omnipresent on the walls and pillars, lintels and niches of sanctuaries, regardless of the deity of their specific dedication.”59

Lakṣmī is worshiped throughout the year in a variety of festivals,60and she is the constant object of *vratas,* “religious vows,” by means of which devotees ask her for a blessing in return for undertaking some act of devotion or piety on her behalf. The blessings requested vary according to the devotee and according to whether the *vrata* is undertaken during a festival in which certain kinds of blessings are traditional. The most common boons, however, have to do with marital fidelity or the longevity of one’s spouse, the fertility of the crops, and the bestowal of material well-being.

The most important festival in which Lakṣmī is worshiped today \(except in Bengal\) is Dīpavalī \(Dīvalī\), which is held in the late autumn. Three important and interrelated themes are seen in this festival: Lakṣmī’s association with wealth and prosperity, her association with fertility and abundant crops, and her association with good fortune in the coming year. Perhaps the most obvious indication that Lakṣmī is identified with prosperity is her popularity among merchants. During this festival it is customary for people, especially businessmen, to worship their account books.61 It seems to be clearly understood by merchants that wealth will not arise without Lakṣmī’s blessing or presence.

Agricultural motifs are also fairly clear in this festival as it is celebrated in some places. Cultivators are enjoined to worship their crops \(which at this time of year have been harvested\) and offer sacrifices of goats and sheep. “Moreover they visit the dunghill which is collected for manuring the field for future crops and fall prostrate and beg to fertilize their lands and to procure abundant crops. In the Decan and in Orissa the heap of cowdung is also worshiped by every householder on this day.”62

Lakṣmī is also associated with crops and food in Orissa on the occasion of the Kaumudī-pūrṇima festival. On these days women invoke Lakṣmī on a mound of new grain and recall a story in which Lakṣmī’s disappearance results in the disappearance of crops and food and her return prompts the return of abundance.63 The worship of Lakṣmī during Durgā Pūjā is also significant in terms of her association with agriculture. Although Durgā Pūjā as it is celebrated today in India is not primarily a harvest festival, there are many indications that the renewed vigor of the crops is still an aspect of the festival.64

The association of Lakṣmī with good fortune in the coming year is also a significant aspect of the Dīpavalī festival. During this festival end-of-the-year motifs are clear. At this time ghosts of the dead are said to return,65 Bali, a demon, is said to emerge from the underworld to rule for three days, goblins and malicious spirits are about,66 and gambling, profligate spending, and boisterous activity are commanded. Throughout the festival Lakṣmī is invoked to ward off the dangerous effects of the returned dead and the emergent demon king and his hosts and to bless the gambler with success that will betoken his good luck during the entire coming year. The banishment of Alakṣmī, the female spirit associated with bad luck and misfortune, is also associated with this festival. It is believed in many places that Alakṣmī is driven away for the coming year by lighting lamps, which is one of the most beautiful and characteristic features of this festival, and by making noise with pots and pans or instruments.67 On another occasion in Bengal an image of Alakṣmī is made and ceremoniously disfigured by cutting off its nose and ears, after which an image of Lakṣmī is installed to signify the presence of good luck in the future.68

During Dīpīvalī people also replace the small clay images of Lakṣmī and Gaṇeśa which are revered in many homes and shops in North India. Lakṣmī’s association with Gaṇeśa, the elephant-headed son of Śiva and Pārvatī, is prominent in North India. Indeed, it is more common to see Lakṣmī beside Gaṇeśa than beside Viṣṇu in most parts of North India today. This association represents the continuity of some important themes in Lakṣmī’s character. Lakṣmī is often associated with elephants, the Gaja-Lakṣmī motif being ancient and consistent throughout her history. Her current association with Ganeśa probably suggests meanings similar to those inherent in the Gaja-Lakṣmī scenes. In addition, Gaṇeśa is a Yakṣa-type figure, associated with riches and good luck. It is appropriate that, like Kubera, he should be revered along with Lakṣmī, herself the embodiment of wealth and luck.

Another aspect of Lakṣmī is the focus of a summer festival in honor of her and Viṣṇu. This festival signals the point at which Viṣṇu is believed to fall asleep for several months. It is common to pray to Viṣṇu at this time to prevent the loss of one’s wife or husband. In this festival Lakṣmī and Viṣṇu are the embodiment of marital harmony and bliss. Lakṣmī is understood to be the faithful, loving, and obedient wife.69 At another festival in honor of her and Viṣṇu, Lakṣmī plays the role of a jealous wife and protector of the home. Viṣṇu is said to go off with another consort during this festival, and Lakṣmī, in anger over his unfaithfulness, breaks his vehicle and temporarily locks him out of their home \(the temple\).70




