+++
title = "03 PĀRVATĪ"

+++





Rivaling Śrī-Lakṣmī in popularity in the Hindu tradition is the goddess Pārvatī. Unlike Śrī-Lakṣmī, Pārvatī has hardly any independent history of her own. Her identity and nature and nearly all her mythological deeds are defined or acted out vis-à-vis her consort/husband, the great ascetic god Śiva. Since epic times, when Pārvatī first appeared as a significant deity, she has been identified as a reincarnation of the goddess Satī, Śiva’s first wife, who committed suicide because of an insult to her husband. So closely associated is Pārvatī with Satī that the two goddesses are usually treated as one, and their mythologies eventually come to sound very much alike. Both are defined in terms of their courtship and marriage with Śiva, and Pārvatī’s mythology is almost always treated as the ongoing story of Satī.

In classical Hindu mythology the raison d’être of Pārvatī’s \(and Satī’s\) birth is to lure Śiva into marriage and thus into the wider circle of worldly life from which he is aloof as a lone ascetic living in the wilds of the mountains. This goddess \(in both persons, as Satī and Pārvatī\) represents the complementary pole to the ascetic, world-denying pole in the Hindu tradition. In her role as maiden, wife, and later mother \(as Pārvatī\) she extends Śiva’s circle of activity into the realm of the householder, where his stored-up energy is released in positive ways.

As is the case with Lakṣmī, Pārvatī comes to represent certain philosophic absolutes in her association with Śiva. As his *śakti,* or embodied power, she becomes identified with the creative force of the cosmos and the underlying potency of things. Also like Lakṣmī she takes on a paradigmatic role as the ideal wife and mother. In fact, the act of suttee \(Sanskrit *satī*\), in which a Hindu widow immolates herself on her husband’s funeral pyre as a final and consummate act of loyalty and devotion, is patterned on the goddess Satī, from whom the name of the act is derived. In some schools of śaivism Pārvatī also assumes the role of ideal devotee. Finally, in śaiva Siddhānta, a southern school of śaivism, Pārvatī sometimes takes on the role of Śiva’s embodied grace and thus comes to play a role somewhat similar to Śrī-Lakṣmī’s role in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism.

## EARLY REFERENCES TO PĀRVATĪ

The goddess Satī-Pārvatī does not appear in Vedic literature. Several references to Śiva’s sister or wife do occur in Vedic texts, but the names for these deities only connect them tenuously, if at all, to the later Satī-Pārvatī. A being named Ambikā \(a common epithet for several goddesses in the later tradition, especially Durgā\) is called Śiva’s sister in one passage,1 while in another text she is said to be his consort.2 Elsewhere in Vedic literature Śiva’s wife is called Rudrāni. These references are never detailed enough to enable us to know if the deity named has any resemblance to the later, fully developed goddess Satī-Pārvatī.

The *Kena-upaniṣad* contains a goddess named Umā Haimavatī \(3.12\). This is one of the most common names of the later Satī-Pārvatī, but this reference does not associate the goddess with Śiva, nor does it associate her with mountains, except by name \(Haimavatī meaning “she who belongs to Himavat,” who is the Himalaya Mountains personified as a god\). Her primary role in this text is that of a mediator who reveals the knowledge of *brahman* to the gods. She appears in the text suddenly, and as suddenly disappears. It is little more than conjecture to identify her with the later goddess Satī-Pārvatī, although quite naturally later writers do make the identification when describing the exploits of Satī or Pārvatī. To devotees of the goddess this early Upaniṣadic reference provides proof of her venerable history in the Hindu tradition; later texts that extol Śiva and Pārvatī retell the episode in such a way as to leave no doubt that it is śiva’s spouse who appears before the assembled gods in order to reveal to them the truth that Śiva is absolute reality and underlies them all.3

Both textual and archaeological evidence for the existence of Satī-Pārvatī appear by the epic period \(400 B.C.- A.D. 400\). Both the *Rāmāyaṇa* and *Mahābhārata* present Satī-Pārvatī as the wife of Śiva. Several important mythological events, though not told in detail, are referred to in the epics, and it is clear that the central themes of the later, developed mythology featuring Satī-Pārvatī are known to the epic writers. The *Mahābhārata* describes the destruction of Dakṣa’s sacrifice \(10.18; 12.274\), mentions the birth of Kārttikeya and the defeat of the demon Tāraka \(3.213–216; 13.83–84\), and describes Śiva and Pārvatī as dwelling in the Himalayas, where they sport and play dice \(13.140.43–44\). Although not numerous, some images of Pārvatī, or at least a goddess associated with Śiva or a śaiva symbol, appear on coins in this period.4

## THE MYTHOLOGY OF SATĪ

Not until the plays of Kālidāsa \(fifth to sixth century A.D.\) and the *Purānas* \(A.D. 350 through the thirteenth century\) do we find the central myths of Satī and Pārvatī told in detail. Two distinct goddesses emerge in this fully developed mythology: Satī, the daughter of Dakṣa, who becomes Śiva’s first wife, and Pārvatī, daughter of Himavat and his wife Menā, who is a reincarnation of Sati and becomes Śiva’s second wife. Although the mythologies of the two goddesses \(or the two lives of the same goddess\) are similar in many details \(and have probably influenced each other\), each goddess \(or each life of the goddess\) is distinctive enough to be treated separately.

The goddess Satī sets out to win the great god Śiva for her husband.5 In some versions of the myth Satī’s quest is instigated by the god Brahma, Dakṣa’s father, who wants to humiliate Śiva because Śiva had insulted him earlier.6 Śiva had laughed at Brahmā when Brahmā had lusted after his own daughter, and Brahmā vowed to seduce Śiva into the pangs of sexual passion. Elsewhere the motive is more vague. In the Rudra-sarṁitā of the *Śiva-purāṇa* Brahmā says that if Śiva is not involved in the created world the creation will lack auspiciousness \(in fact Śiva means “auspicious”\) \(2.11.27\) or that the creation simply will not be able to continue \(2.11.43\). In fact, these latter reasons for involving Śiva in sex and marriage are more helpful in understanding the underlying meanings of the Satī myths than the more common reason of Brahmā’s getting even with Śiva.

Satī is usually described as beautiful, but in most versions of her mythology it is her devotion and asceticism that attract Śiva’s attention \(2.16.39, 44, 50\). At times she is tested by Śiva, or an agent of Śiva, but she always persists, and in the end Śiva grants her a boon for her austerities. She asks to marry him, and he agrees, having discovered at some point the presence of desire \(*kāma*\), which has made her extremely desirable. She insists upon a proper marriage involving rituals and guests, despite Śiva’s impatience. Brahmā acts as the divine priest, and the two are duly married. At some point in the narrative, tension begins to develop between Dakṣa \(Satī’s father\) and Śiva. The tension arises from Dakṣa’s distaste for Śiva’s odd appearance and strange habits. As a world renouncer Śiva does not behave according to the ways of the world, and his appearance is most unconventional \(2.26.14–16\).

Śiva and Satī retire to Śiva’s mountain abode and dally there for many years. Dakṣa in the meantime plans a great sacrifice and invites all divine beings of any importance, except Śiva and Satī. Śiva is quite undisturbed by this deliberate snub. Satī, however, is furious at the insult to her husband \(2.28\). She storms off to her father’s abode, where he snubs her. Outraged by the way in which her father has treated Śiva, she kills herself \(2.29–30\). Hearing the news of Satī’s death, Śiva becomes angry and creates Vīrabhadra and, in some versions of the mythology, other fierce beings. The demons proceed to Dakṣa’s sacrificial arena, where they defeat the assembled divine hosts and destroy the sacrifice. Dakṣa himself is usually said to be killed in the battle \(2.32–37\). Most versions of the story then tell of the reinstitution of the sacrifice and the resuscitation of Dakṣa \(2.42.21–31\). Śiva is included in the sacrifice along with the other gods, and the sacrifice proceeds smoothly \(2.43\).

In some versions of the myth, either before or after the reinstitution of the sacrifice, Śiva discovers Satī’s body. He picks her up and, sobbing in grief, carries her about the universe. This causes cosmic disruptions, and Viṣṇu is summoned to end Śiva’s grief. Viṣṇu follows the grieving Śiva about and gradually slices bits and pieces from Satī’s body until nothing remains. The pieces of her corpse fall to the earth; wherever a bit of her body lands a sacred place, called a *pīṭha*, is established, where goddesses of various names and types become the objects of worship.7 Realizing that Satī’s corpse has disappeared, Śiva ends his grief and returns to his mountain retreat, where he retires into ascetic aloofness. In some versions Śiva comes to earth in search of Satī. Finding her yoni established at Kāmarūpa in Assam,8 Śiva assumes the form of the *liṅga* and plunges himself into her, where the two remain conjoined permanently.9

In general terms the underlying theme or meaning of this myth seems fairly clear. The theme of Śiva’s alternation between the poles of asceticism and eroticism10 and the creative \(sometimes destructive\) tension that results from this alternation pervades the entire corpus of Śiva mythology. Underlying the mythology seems to be the assumption that Śiva’s stored-up potency, which accumulates during asceticism, should be released into the world to invigorate or enliven creation. In the logic of this mythology Satī plays the role of luring Śiva from ascetic isolation into creative participation in the world. This theme is further developed and embellished in the Pārvatī cycle of myths in which Śiva actually becomes involved in an ongoing family situation and becomes a divine householder.

In the Satī myths Śiva’s involvement in the world is most clearly suggested in the destruction and reinstitution of the sacrifice and his descent to earth to dwell with Satī’s yoni in the form of the liṅga. In the Vedic tradition Śiva is an ambiguous deity at best. He has many fearsome and inauspicious qualities, and when offerings are made to him they are made outside inhabited areas.11 The theme in the Satī myths of Śiva’s exclusion from the sacrifice thus has considerable historical justification. Śiva was undoubtedly a non-Āryan indigenous deity who was looked upon with considerable suspicion by the Brahman custodians of the sacrificial cult. His association with world renunciation, asceticism, and the powers of fertility as symbolized by the liṅga probably marked him as a deity who belonged to the fringes of society from the point of view of the Brahman establishment. The antagonism between Śiva and Dakṣa probably reflects this underlying conflict. Eventually, of course, Śiva became one of the most important and dynamic deities in the Hindu pantheon. The reinstitution of the sacrifice with Śiva included among those who partake of it probably represents his incorporation into established Brahman religion.

Satī’s devotion to Śiva and her outrage at the way he is treated eventually bring him within the sacrificial arena. He is indifferent to the doings of Dakṣa until Satī kills herself because of the insult to her husband. Satī comes from the realm of established religion, the order of dharma, and marries into the realm of asceticism, thus combining in herself the two opposing worlds. When she kills herself she precipitates a clash between these two worlds, between Dakṣa and Śiva, which is initially destructive but ultimately beneficial and creative. Satī’s role is as a mediating influence between the two religious poles, both affirmed to be central, in the Hindu tradition. Her ability to involve Śiva in the sacrifice makes Śiva, previously aloof from the world, accessible in the sacrificial cult, the primary point of which is to maintain and nourish the creation.

Satī performs a similar feat when her body is cut to pieces and falls to earth. By following her to earth and embedding himself in her yoni, Śiva is literally brought down to earth. Where previously he dwelled in the mountains and engaged in austerities, indifferent to the ongoing creation, he now is fully engaged in the creation as symbolized by the conjunction of the yoni and linga. Satī, in her role as mediator, has succeeded in involving the great ascetic god in the creation by transforming him into the great god of sexual power and vigor. Again, her role has been primarily that of making Śiva accessible to the world by attracting him to her in the form of the yoni. While Śiva may continue to perform heroic asceticism in his mountain retreat in one of his several forms, he continues to be accessible to the world in the form of the liṅga. In the myths of Satī, this is her triumph.

The establishment of centers of worship on earth where pieces of Satī’s body fell repeats the theme of making the divine accessible vis-à-vis Satī herself. In this myth the earth is sacralized \(the earth being understood primarily as the Indian subcontinent\). The earth itself is seen as the body of the goddess Satī. She becomes the earth and as such is made accessible to her devotees or to those who seek her powers.12

Satī’s death is thus transformative. Through her death she provokes Śiva into a direct conflict with the sacrificial cult and then an accommodation with it. In this way Śiva is brought within the circle of dharma, within the order of established religion. Similarly, Satī’s corpse, or pieces of her corpse, sacralize the earth. In dying she gives herself up to be accessible on earth to those who need her power or blessing. In transplanting or transforming herself into the earth, she also brings into the sphere of human society the invigorating power of Śiva in the form of the liṅga.

The Satī myth again reminds us of the archaic type of divine pair in which a male deity is associated with the sky and a female deity with the earth. Their union or marriage is necessary for life to be generated and sustained. Satī’s identification with the earth and Śiva’s identification with the distant Himalayas and their subsequent union as yoni and liṅga seem to be a variant on this theme. The main point of the Satī mythology is to bring about a marriage between these two deities so that creation may continue and prosper. The concluding chapter of Satī’s mythology makes it clear that this has been accomplished. In the form of the yoni \(all individual women\) she attracts Śiva \(all individual men\) eternally.

The goddess Satī is also associated with the practice of widow suicide in Hinduism.13 During the medieval period the custom of widows’ burning themselves to death on their husbands’ funeral pyres became accepted as the act of a faithful wife. The word *satī* \(suttee\) came to be applied to this practice. The term means “faithful wife,” and its relation to the goddess Satī is clear in the sense that Satī is portrayed as a faithful wife of Śiva. It is not altogether clear, however, that Satī’s suicide provides the mythological paradigm for suttee. Satī’s suicide, although provoked by an insult to her husband, causes her husband considerable grief and outrage. The whole point of suttee is for the widow to follow her dead husband. She affirms in this act that she cannot live without him, that her entire identity is bound up with his. Satī’s suicide, although perhaps the act of a faithful wife who cannot endure insults to her husband, results not in her maintaining a relationship with her husband but in her breaking that relationship.

## THE MYTHOLOGY OF PĀRVATĪ

Pārvatī’s name, which means “she who dwells in the mountains” or “she who is of the mountain,” and her many epithets, such as śailasutā \(daughter of the mountain peaks\), Giriputrī \(daughter of the mountains\), Girīśājaputrī \(daughter of the king of the mountains\), Girīśā \(mistress of the mountains\), identify her with mountainous regions. It is quite possible that Pārvatī’s early history and origin may lie with a goddess who dwelled in the mountains and was associated with non-Āryan tribal peoples. Such goddesses are sometimes referred to in Sanskrit texts.14 Such a goddess would be an appropriate mate for Śiva, himself a deity who dwells in mountainous regions and on the fringes of society. Indeed, Pārvatī herself is described as a female forester in the company of Śiva, who is also described as a forester in the *Mahābhārata* \(3.40.1–5\). For the most part, however, Pārvatī’s mythology does not describe her as a goddess associated with wild places or with people living on the fringes of culture. She is not usually included in lists of the group of goddesses called Mātṛkās \(mothers\), who are described as bloodthirsty, the bringers of disease, the speakers of foreign tongues, and fond of inaccessible places \(9.45\). If Pārvatī ever was associated with such a tradition, almost every trace of that identity is gone by the time we find her mentioned in the Hindu literary tradition.

Pārvatī’s mythology is almost entirely dominated by her association with Śiva. Her nature, too, develops or is characterized by her relationship with Śiva. Although in certain Śākta texts she is said to transcend Śiva and to subsume within herself all male deities15 or in other texts is identified with certain philosophic absolutes, for the most part these are late embellishments on her mythology and character and are the result of a theological effort on the part of devotees partial to various goddesses \(the Śāktas\) to assert the underlying unity of all goddesses.16 Pārvatī is primarily the goddess who is Śiva’s wife, she who won him as her husband after heroic efforts and who persuaded or provoked him into creating a child, who was necessary for the preservation of the world.

Most renditions of Pārvatī’s mythology explain the goddess’s birth as necessary for producing a child of Śiva.17 The demon Tāraka has been granted the boon of being invincible to any creature except a child of Śiva. As Śiva is an ascetic, the gods have to find a woman or goddess capable of luring Śiva into a sexual encounter or marriage. Pārvatī is usually understood to be a reincarnation of Satī and sometimes is described as consenting to be reborn for the help of the gods when she is petitioned by them.18 In some versions Pārvatī \(and Satī\) are understood to be manifestations of the supreme reality in the universe, the Mahādevī \(great goddess\), who condescends to incarnate herself for much the same reason that Viṣṇu does in his *avatāras*, to maintain the balance between dharma and *adharma*.19 Sometimes the reason given by Pārvatī for her birth is her desire to reward Menā, the wife of Himavat, for her great devotion to Pārvatī in her former life as Satī.20

Pārvatī, then, is born to Himavat and Menā. She is usually described as dark and in some versions is given the name Kālī, “the dark one,” because of her complexion.21 She is also described as very beautiful. In some accounts she shows a keen interest in Śiva from the outset, repeating his name to herself and taking delight in hearing about his appearance and deeds. While she is a child a sage comes to her home and after examining the marks on her body predicts that she will marry a naked yogi.22 When it becomes clear that she is destined to marry Śiva, her parents are usually described as feeling honored. Pārvatī is delighted, and she is sometimes said to remember Śiva from her past life as Satī.

At some point prior to or during Pārvatī’s attempts to attract Śiva’s attention for the purpose of marriage, the god Kāma is sent by the gods to awaken Śiva’s lust. When he attracts Śiva’s attention with sounds and scents of spring and tries to perturb Śiva with his intoxicating weapons, Śiva burns him to ashes with the fire from his middle eye. Although the gods and Pārvatī lament Kāma’s destruction, it is clear later in the story that Kāma’s powers were not destroyed when he was burned, for Śiva eventually falls in love with Pārvatī and recreates Kāma in bodily form at the request of Kāma’s wife, Rati.23

Pārvatī persists in her quest to win Śiva as her husband by setting out to perform austerities. One of the most effective ways to achieve what a person wants in traditional Hinduism is to perform *tapas*, “ascetic austerities.” If one is persistent and heroic enough, one will generate so much heat \(also called *tapas*\) that the gods will be forced to grant the ascetic a wish in order to save themselves and the world from being scorched. Pārvatī’s method of winning Śiva is thus a common approach to fulfilling one’s desires. It is also appropriate, however, in terms of demonstrating to Śiva that she can compete with him in his own realm, that she has the inner resources, control, and fortitude to cut herself off from the world and completely master her physical needs. By performing *tapas* Pārvatī abandons the world of the householder and enters the realm of the world renouncer, Śiva’s world. Most versions of the myth describe her as outdoing all the great sages in her austerities. She performs all the traditional mortifications, such as sitting in the midst of four fires in the middle of summer, remaining exposed to the elements during the rainy season and during the winter, living on leaves or air only, standing on one leg for years, and so on.24 Eventually she accumulates so much heat25 that the gods are made uncomfortable and go to Śiva to persuade him to grant Pārvatī’s wish so that she will cease her efforts.26

In some versions of the myth Pārvatī is tempted by an agent of Śiva, or by Śiva himself in disguise. She is told that Śiva’s appearance is terrible and that his habits are uncivilized and inauspicious.27 She is urged to desist from her desire to marry such a distasteful character. Pārvatī is never dissuaded from her purpose by these temptations, and as a result of her steadfastness Śiva agrees to marry her.

The marriage is duly arranged and elaborately undertaken. Śiva’s marriage procession, which includes most of the Hindu pantheon, is often described at length. A common motif during the marriage preparations is Menā’s outrage when she actually sees Śiva for the first time. She cannot believe that her beautiful daughter is about to marry such an outrageous-looking character; in some versions Menā threatens suicide and faints when told that the odd-looking figure in the marriage procession is indeed her future son-in-law.28

After the two are married they depart to Mount Kailasa, Śiva’s favorite dwelling place, and immerse themselves completely in sexual dalliance, which continues uninterruptedly for long periods of time. Their lovemaking is so intense that it shakes the cosmos, and the gods become frightened.29 In some versions the gods are also frightened at the prospect of what a child will be like from the union of two such potent deities. They fear the child’s extraordinary powers. For whichever reason \(sometimes the gods are simply impatient\), the gods interrupt Śiva and Pārvatī’s lovemaking. As a result Śiva spills his semen outside Pārvatī. The potent seed, which is extremely fiery and hot, passes from one container to another, the container varying in different versions of the myth, until it is finally contained in a suitable place, often the Ganges River, where it is incubated and born as the child Kārttikeya. Kārttikeya eventually finds his way back to his father and mother and by defeating the demon Tāraka rescues the world. Pārvatī accepts the child as her own, and sometimes we are told that her breasts ooze milk in affection for the child when she first sees him.30

A second child completes the divine family of Śiva and Pārvatī when Gaṇeśa is born. Pārvatī, desiring privacy, wishes to have a child of her own who will protect her from unwanted intrusions. She creates Gañeśa from the dirt and sweat of her body and commands him to guard the entrance to her house against any intruder. When Śiva himself tries to enter her apartments, Gaṇeśa refuses to admit him. Śiva becomes angry and decapitates the boy. Pārvatī is furious and demands that Gaṇeśa be restored to life. Śiva duly restores him to life by replacing his human head with an elephant head and puts him in charge of all his troops and heavenly attendants.31

For the most part Śiva and Pārvatī’s married and family life is portrayed as harmonious, blissful, and calm. In iconography the two are typically shown sitting in happy, intimate embrace.32 As a family the four deities are also typically shown in harmonious association.33 A scene of the divine family in a painting from the Kangra school of art shows the foursome seated around a fire. Kārttikeya and Pārvatī are helping each other thread a garland of skulls, while Śiva and Gaṇesa play idly with one of Śiva’s serpent ornaments.34 Many devotional hymns describe intimate family details, such as Kārttikeya’s playing with Śiva’s skull ornaments or mistaking Śiva’s crescent moon for a lotus bud.



He touches the garland made of skulls

in hope that they are geese

and shakes the crescent moon with eagerness to grasp

a lotus filament.

Thinking the forehead-eye a lotus flower,

he tries to pry it open.

May Skanda thus intent on play

within his father’s arms protect you.35

Śiva and Pārvatī do argue and insult each other from time to time. Bengali accounts of Śiva and Pārvatī often describe Śiva as an irresponsible, hemp-smoking husband who cannot look after himself. Pārvatī is portrayed as the long-suffering wife who complains from time to time to her mother but who always remains steadfast to her husband.36 Sometimes the outcome of a game of dice results in a quarrel, particularly when Śiva loses his loincloth to Pārvatī and she laughs at him. In another incident īiva becomes angry at her when she playfully covers his eyes with her hands from behind and the world is plunged into darkness.37 On another occasion Pārvatī feels pique when Śiva calls her by the nickname Kālī \(blackie\), which Pārvatī takes as a slur on her appearance. She resolves to rid herself of her dark complexion and does so by performing austerities.38 Having assumed a golden complexion she then becomes known by the name Gaurī \(the bright or golden one\). In some versions of the myth her discarded, dark complexion or sheath gives birth to or becomes a warrior goddess who undertakes heroic feats of combat against demons.39



Pārvatī with Gaṇeśa. Pratapaditya Pal, *Indo-Asian Art from the John Gilmore Ford Collection* \(Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1971\), fig. 51. Reprinted by permission of the Walters Art Gallery.

The presence of an alter ego or a dark, violent side to Pārvatī is suggested in several myths in which demons threaten the cosmos and Pārvatī is asked to help the gods by defeating the demon in question. Typically, when Pārvatī grows angry at the prospect of war, a violent goddess is born from her wrath and proceeds to fight on Pārvatī’s behalf. This deity is often identified as the bloodthirsty goddess Kālī.40 For the most part, however, the myths emphasize Pārvatī’s milder side. So out of character is Pārvatī on the battlefield that another goddess, it seems, must be summoned to embody her wrath and dissociate this fury from Pārvatī herself.

## TENSION AND RESOLUTION

The main theme of the Pārvatī cycle of myths is clear. The association between Pārvatī and Śiva represents the perennial tension in Hinduism between the ascetic ideal and the householder ideal. Pārvatī, for the most part, represents the householder. Her mission in almost all renditions of the myth is to lure Śiva into the world of marriage, sex, and children, to tempt him away from asceticism, yoga, and otherworldly preoccupations. In this role Pārvatī is cast as a figure who upholds the order of dharma, who enhances life in the world, who represents the beauty and attraction of worldly, sexual life, who cherishes the house and society rather than the forest, the mountains, or the ascetic life. In this role she repeats the feat of Satī in luring Śiva into an erotic relationship, which this time eventually brings him within the sacrificial, priestly order permanently. Pārvatī civilizes Śiva with her presence; indeed, she domesticates him. Of her role in relation to Śiva in the hymns of Māṇikkavācakar, a ninth-century poet-saint from South India, it has been said: “Śiva, the great unpredictable ‘madman’ \(*pittaṉ, piccaṉ*\), as Māṇikkavācakar occasionally addresses him . . . , is rendered momentarily sane \(i.e., behaves in a socially acceptable manner\) when in the company of the goddess. . . . Contact with his properly cultured spouse seems to connect him with ordinary social reality and temporarily domesticates him.”41

The tension between Pārvatī and Śiva as representatives of the main types of religiosity in Hinduism is stated in various ways in the myths. Śiva is always said to have no family, no lineage, and no interest in progeny, which is one of the central concerns of the order of dharma and the householder’s religion. Pārvatī, on the contrary, is born into an established family and longs for marriage, children, and a home. Śiva is associated with fire, which dries up or burns up the juices of life. His inner fire is so intense that in one myth he is shown to contain ashes in his veins instead of blood.42 In one of the most famous of his myths he burns the god of lust to ashes with the fire from his middle eye. Pārvatī is associated with Soma, the deity or substance associated with the life essence of all plants. In many myths it is she who asks Śiva to revive Kāma, as she realizes that the god of sexual desire is at the root of the householder’s life. In relation to Kāma, then, Śiva is a destructive fire, whereas Pārvatī is a refreshing, liquid glance: “While the fiery glance is Śiva, the Soma glance is Pārvatī, who revives Kāma when Śiva has burnt him.”43 Śiva is often said to wear on his body the ashes of the burnt Kama. Kāma is resuscitated when Śiva embraces Pārvatī and the sweat from her body mingles with the ashes of the burned god.44 Elsewhere it is said that when Kāma was burned by Śiva he entered the limbs of Pārvatī.45 In the most general terms, Śiva as Agni is the fire that destroys the world at the end of each cosmic age. Pārvatī as Soma, in contrast, is the cosmic waters from which the world is inevitably reborn.

Throughout Hindu mythology it is well known that one of Śiva’s principal functions is the destruction of the cosmos. In fact, Śiva has about him a wild, unpredictable, destructive aspect that is often mentioned. As the great cosmic dancer he periodically performs the *tāṇḍava,* an especially violent dance. Wielding a broken battle-ax, he dances so wildly that the cosmos is destroyed completely. In descriptions of this dance Śiva’s whirling arms and flying locks are said to crash into the heavenly bodies, knocking them off course or destroying them utterly. The mountains shake and the oceans heave as the world is destroyed by his violent dancing.46 Pārvatī, in contrast, is portrayed as a patient builder, one who follows Śiva about, trying to soften the violent effects of her husband.47 She is a great force for preservation and reconstruction in the world and as such offsets the violence of Śiva. A seventeenth-century Tamil work pictures Pārvatī as a patient child who creates the worlds in the form of little houses. Śiva is pictured as constantly frustrating her purpose by destroying what she has so carefully built.

The crazy old madman stands in front,

dancing, destroying the beautiful little house that  
you have built in play.

You don’t become angry, but every time \(he destroys  
it\) you build it again.48

When Śiva does his violent *tāṇḍava* dance Pārvatī is described as calming him with soft glances, or she is said to complement his violence with a slow, creative step of her own.49

Pārvatī’s goal in her relationship with Śiva is nothing less than the domestication of the lone, ascetic god whose behavior borders on madness.50 Śiva is indifferent to social propriety, does not care about offspring, declares women to be a hindrance to the spiritual life, and is disdainful of the trappings of the householder’s life.51 Pārvatī tries to involve him in the worldly life of the householder by arguing that he should observe conventions if he loves her and wants her. She persuades him, for example, to marry her according to the proper rituals, to observe custom, instead of simply running off with her.52 She is less successful, however, in getting him to change his attire and ascetic habits. She often complains of his nakedness and finds his ornaments disgraceful.53 Usually prompted by her mother, Pārvatī sometimes complains that she does not have a proper house to live in. Śiva, as is well known, does not have a house but prefers to live in caves, on mountains, or in forests or to wander the world as a homeless beggar. Many myths delight in Śiva’s response to Pārvatī’s domestic pleas for a house. When she complains that the rains will soon come and that she has no house to protect her, Śiva simply takes her to the high mountain peaks above the clouds where it does not rain.54 Elsewhere he describes his “house” as the universe and argues that an ascetic understands the whole world to be his dwelling place.55 These philosophic arguments never satisfy Pārvatī, but she rarely, if ever, wins this argument and gains a house. In the final analysis, despite her success in involving Śiva in marital and family affairs, despite her initiating sexual desire in him, Śiva always remains in part antisocial and ascetic, a god who lives on the fringes of society.

The theme of Pārvatī’s domesticating Śiva, or trying to domesticate him, is also seen in her tempering, or taming, his *tapas* and his sexual vigor, both of which are dangerous in excess. The theme of an ascetic’s great austerities causing such heat that the world itself is scorched is common in Hindu mythology. The solution to this threat to the world is almost always either having a woman seduce the ascetic \(women hardly ever play the role of the ascetic\), granting a boon to the ascetic which distracts him from his asceticism, or granting the boon for which he undertook his asceticism in the first place. Śiva, too, does excessive *tapas* and thus threatens the world,56 and it is Pārvatī’s role to distract him from his asceticism or seduce him into erotic or domestic entanglements. In many myths Pārvatī is not so much Śiva’s complement as his rival, tricking, seducing, or luring him away from ascetic practices.

Śiva’s sexual vigor is also threatening to the world in quantity and intensity, and again it is Pārvatī who subdues, tames, or otherwise controls Śiva’s immense sexual vitality.



The sages cursed Śiva’s *liṅga* to fall to the earth, and it burnt everything before it like a fire. Never still, it went to the underworld and to heaven and everywhere on earth. All creatures were troubled, and the sages went in desperation to Brahmā, who said to them, “As long as the *liṅga* is not still, there will be nothing auspicious in the universe. You must propitiate Devī so that she will take the form of the *yoni*, and then the *liṅga* will become still.” They honoured Śiva, and he appeared and said, “If my *liṅga* is held in the *yoni,* then all will be well. Only Pārvatī can hold the *liṅga,* and then it will become calm.” They propitiated him, and thus liṅga-worship was established.57

Śiva is a god of excesses, both ascetic and sexual, and Pārvatī plays the role of modifier. As a representative of the householder ideal she represents the ideal of controlled sex, namely, married sex, which is opposed to both asceticism and eroticism.

The theme of the conflict, tension, or opposition between the way of the ascetic and the way of the householder in the mythology of Pārvatī and Śiva yields to a vision of reconciliation, interdependence, and symbiotic harmony in a series of images that combine the two deities. Three such images or themes are central to the mythology, iconography, and philosophy of Pārvatī: \(1\) the theme of *Śiva-śakti,* \(2\) the image of Śiva as Ardhanārīśvara \(the Lord who is half woman\), and \(3\) the image of the liṅga and yoni.

The idea that the great male gods all possess an inherent power by which or through which they undertake creative activity is assumed in medieval Hindu mythology. When this power, or *śakti*, is personified it is always in the form of a goddess. Pārvatī, quite naturally, assumes the identity of Śiva’s *sakti* in many myths and in some philosophic systems. In the role of Śiva’s *śakti,* Pārvatī performs functions, or assumes meanings, which imply an underlying harmony or interdependent relationship between herself and Śiva. She is often identified with the force underlying and impelling creation. While Śiva remains more or less aloof in the creation of the world, Pārvatī as *śakti* is active, pervading the creation as its underlying strength and power.58 In this active, creative role she is sometimes identified with *prakṛti* \(nature\), whereas Śiva is identified with *puruṣa* \(pure spirit\).59 As *prakṛti,* Pārvatī represents the inherent tendency of nature to express itself in concrete forms and individual beings. In this task, however, whether as *śakti* or *prakṛti,* it is understood that Pārvatī either must be set in motion by Śiva or must act according to his will, wish, or design. She is not seen as antagonistic to him. Her role as his *śakti* is almost always interpreted as positive. Through Pārvatī, Śiva \(the Absolute\) is able to express himself in the creation. Without her he would remain inert, aloof, inactive. Just as in the mythology Pārvatī is necessary for involving Śiva in creation, so as his *śakti* she is necessary for his self-expression in creation. It is only in association with her that Śiva is able to realize or manifest his full potential. Without Pārvatī Śiva’s great power does not, or cannot, manifest itself in creation. Pārvatī as *śakti* not only complements Śiva, she completes him.

A variety of images and metaphors are used to express the harmonious interdependence and close identity of Pārvatī as *śakti* and Śiva as the *śaktīmān,* the possessor of *śakti.* Śiva is said to be the male principle throughout creation, Pārvatī the female principle;60 Śiva is the sky, Pārvatī the earth;61 Śiva is subject, Pārvatī object;62 Śiva is the ocean, Pārvatī the seashore;63 Śiva is the sun, Pārvatī its light;64 Pārvatī is all tastes and smells, Śiva the enjoyer of all tastes and smells;65 Pārvatī is the embodiment of all individual souls, Śiva the soul itself;66 Pārvatī assumes every form that is worthy to be thought of, Śiva thinks of all such forms;67 Śiva is day, Pārvatī night;68 Pārvatī is creation, Śiva the creator;69 Pārvatī is speech, Śiva meaning;70 and so on. In short, the two are actually one—different aspects of ultimate reality—and as such are complementary, not antagonistic.

The meaning of the Ardhanārīśvara form of Śiva is similar. The image shows a half-male, half-female figure. The right side is Śiva and is adorned with his ornaments; the left side is Pārvatī and adorned with her ornaments.71 In the *śiva-purāṅa* the god Brahmā is unable to continue his task of creation because the creatures that he has produced do not multiply. He propitiates Śiva and requests him to come to his aid. Śiva then appears in his half-male, half-female form. The hermaphrodite form splits into Śiva and Pārvatī, and Pārvatī, at Brahmā’s request, pervades the creation with her female nature, which duly awakens the male aspect of creation into fertile activity.72 Without its female half, or female nature,73 the godhead as Śiva is incomplete and is unable to proceed with creation. To an even greater extent than the *śiva-śakti* idea, the androgynous image of Śiva and Pārvatī emphasizes that the two deities are absolutely necessary to each other, and only in union can they satisfy each other and fulfill themselves. In this form the godhead transcends sexual particularity or, perhaps more accurately, includes both dimensions of sexual particularity. God is both male and female, both father and mother, both aloof and active, both fearsome and gentle, both destructive and constructive, and so on.



Ardhanārīśvara, the Lord as half woman. South Indian bronze, Choja, eleventh century A.D. Government Museum, Madras. Mario Bussagli and Calembus Sivaramamurti, *5000 Years of the Art of India* \(New York: Harry Abrams, 1981\), fig. 314, p. 255. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

The image of the linga in the yoni, which is the most common image of the deity in Śiva temples,74 similarly teaches the lesson that the tension between Śiva and Pārvatī is ultimately resolved in interdependence. Satī and Pārvatī as sexual objects succeed in tempering both Śiva’s excessive detachment from the world and his excessive sexual vigor. In the form of the yoni in particular Satī-Pārvatī fulfills and completes, while at the same time tempering, Śiva’s creative tendencies. As the great yogi who accumulates immense sexual potency he is symbolized by the linga. This great potency is creatively released in sexual or marital contact with Satl-Pārvatī. The ubiquitous image of the liṅga in the yoni symbolizes the creative release in the ultimate erotic act of power stored through asceticism. The erotic act is thus enhanced, made more potent, fecund, and creative, by the stored-up power of Śiva’s asceticism. The liṅga and the yoni symbolize a creative interaction between the world of the ascetic, in which sexual abstinence is mandatory, and the life of the householder, in which sex is necessary.75

While many of the myths of Śiva and Pārvatī seem to accentuate the tension between the two, certain iconographic and philosophic themes concerning the divine pair show a preference for depicting or understanding them as in basic harmony. As a couple they are usually shown as affectionate. The half-male, half-female image also emphasizes the uniting of opposites. The lesson seems to be that the two poles that they represent, dharma and *mokṣa*, should not be isolated from each other. In relationship with Pārvatī, Śiva does not give up asceticism entirely, nor does Pārvatī give up asceticism entirely after having used it as a means of marrying Śiva. Nonetheless, the mutual bliss of Śiva and Pārvatī also seems to teach that asceticism enhances the intensity of sexuality and makes the orderliness of the householder’s world even more attractive. Held together, or in creative tension, yoga and *bhoga* \(worldly or bodily pleasure\), dharma and *mokṣa*, may be seen to complement and complete each other in the divine pair.

## DEVOTION AND GRACE

Another important facet of Pārvatī is her role as a model of devotion to Śiva, as the devotee of the Lord par excellence. At several points in her mythology Pārvatī is described as devoted to Śiva, as unswerving in her attachment to him, and as incapable of being dissuaded from doting on him despite the most outrageous reports concerning his uncivilized, bizarre habits.76 Her remarkably steadfast, indeed, stubborn, devotion to him is most obvious during her long period of asceticism when she undertakes heroic bodily mortifications in order either to be granted the boon of having Śiva for her husband or to attract the attention of Śiva himself.77 In these scenes Pārvatī is portrayed as a devotee who seeks Śiva’s attention and blessing; it is easy to see how she might become the paradigm for devotees of Śiva, which she does, for example, in the devotional hymns of Māṇikkavācakar, a śaivite saint from Tamilnad.

Pārvatī appears in Māṇikkavācakar’s hymns in the role of the ideal devotee, or in a position that the devotee longs to achieve, in at least two ways. First, Māṇikkavācakar uses the imagery of a love relationship, casting himself in the role of a woman who longs for her lover or husband, Śiva. In placing himself \(and by extention other devotees\) in this role, he identifies himself with Śiva’s beloved, Pārvatī, who thus becomes the model, or vehicle, for devotion.78 In this role Māṇikkavācakar imagines himself, along with women and goddesses, to be doing domestic chores for “her” husband.79 Māṇikkavācakar approaches Śiva by assuming the role and duties of Pārvatī. In this way he is able to relate to Śiva in a most intimate way. Second, Māṇikkavācakar refers several times to the half-male, half-female image of Śiva and Pārvatī and sees in it the ultimate goal of the devotee, to be inextricably united with Śiva. In his longing to be with Śiva, to be consumed by and overcome by his Lord, Māṇikkavācakar sees in this image his desire graphically realized by Pārvatī.80

Another facet of Pārvatī is evident in Tamil śaivism. Pārvatī tends to have a calming, civilizing effect on Śiva. Under her influence or in her presence, Śiva is often tamed, distracted from his wild, rude, mad behavior. In Māṇikkavācakar’s hymns, for example, Śiva never appears before Pārvatī in his outrageous forms, such as the dancer in the cremation ground or the destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice.81 In her presence, it seems, such behavior is inappropriate, and Śiva almost always behaves in properly domestic ways when she is present. Becalmed, Śiva is more attentive to the needs of his devotees \(and to the needs and desires of his spouse\) and more prone to grant them blessings. As the domesticator of Śiva, as the one who is able to distract him from his antisocial behavior and make him turn his attention to the world and to his devotees within the world, Pārvatī may be understood as playing the role of a mediator between the devotee and Śiva. She is a mediator in the sense that she is the one who awakens his grace or the one who is the key to activating his grace. Immersed in yoga, preoccupied with asceticism, dancing wildly with his ghastly companions in the cremation ground, Śiva is indifferent to his spouse, to the world, and to his devotees. In the presence of Pārvatī, in his role as her husband or Lord, Śiva is attentive to the world and to his devotees.

Although Pārvatī’s role as intermediary is never developed in śaivism to the extent that Śrī-Lakṣmī’s role is developed in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism, Pārvatī does comes to be identified with Śiva’s grace in śaiva Siddhanta, a Tamil śaivite school of thought and devotion.82 In this school Śiva’s grace \(*aruḷ*\) is said to play an active role, indeed, almost to have an identity of its own or an independent function. In its active role it is referred to as *aruḷ-catti \(aruḷ-śakti\),* “the power of grace.” This power is sometimes personified, and when it is, it is identified with Pārvatī.83 Furthermore, the *aruḷ-catti* is often said to reside inherently in every human being. Devotion is the means by which this power is awakened and provoked. The implication is that Pārvatī, in subtle form, resides within every human being.84 She is awakened by means of devotion to Śiva, which expresses her most essential nature. Having been awakened, she infuses the devotee with her great devotion to Śiva, and thus the two, Pārvatī and the devotee, merge into one. So it is that Pārvatī’s roles as ideal devotee and as Śiva’s personified grace also merge into a unity.

Finally, Pārvatī often plays the role of the student in relation to Śiva. In many texts,85 especially *Tantras*,86 Pārvatī inquires of Śiva concerning a great many subjects: ritual, meditation, mythology, dharma, and philosophy. At her prompting or in response to her queries, Śiva reveals everything from the particulars of esoteric Tantric rituals to the nondual wisdom of Vedānta. Again, it is Pārvatī who succeeds in capturing Śiva’s attention, in awakening his concern for the world, so that his great wisdom and knowledge, gained by his heroic eons of yogic meditation and brooding, can be revealed. In the role of curious student Pārvatī represents human beings who are anxious for and will benefit from all that Śiva reveals. In her role as student she again might be seen as a kind of mediator, one who coaxes from Śiva what is ultimately beneficial for human beings. Although Pārvatī is not the only one to whom Śiva gives instruction, she is by far the most common figure to be cast in this role.




