+++
title = "05 SĪTĀ"

+++





One of the most popular heroines in Hindu mythology is Sītā. She is known primarily as the wife of Rāma, the hero of the epic *Rāmāyaṇa.* As one of the protagonists of the *Rāmāyaṅa,* Sītā is revered as the model Hindu wife, who, although the victim of injustices, always remains loyal and steadfast to her husband. The divinity of Rāma and Sītā is not stressed in the early *Rāmāyaṇa* of Vālmīki \(written sometime between 200 B.C. and A.D. 200\), but they increasingly become identified as manifestations of the god Viṣṇu and his consort Śri-Lakṣmī in later vernacular renditions of the tale. As early as the fourteenth century Rāma is praised as the supreme manifestation of the divine,1 and in North India today millions of Hindus consider him and Sītā the supreme divine couple. Throughout this period of divinization, Sītā has achieved her status primarily in relation to Rāma. It is her wifely role, which has come to serve as a paradigm in Hindu mythology, legend, and folktale, which has defined Sītā and made her dear to so many Hindus. Sīta is the perfect model of wifely devotion.

Although Sītā is associated with the wife of Rāma in the minds of all Hindus today, a female divinity named Sītā was known prior to Vālmīki’s *Rāmāyaṇa,* and this deity was associated with agricultural fertility. Just why Vālmīki associated the name of this deity with his heroine is not entirely clear, but that he did so consciously seems beyond doubt.

## THE EARLY HISTORY OF SĪTĀ

The word *sītā* means “furrow,” “the line made by the plow,” and is the name of a goddess associated with plowed fields in Vedic literature. In a hymn addressed to the lord of the fields, Kṣetrapati, Sītā is invoked as follows:

Auspicious Sītā, come thou near:  
we venerate and worship thee

That thou mayst bless and prosper us  
and bring us fruits abundantly.

May Indra press the furrow down,  
may Pūshan guide its course aright.

May she, as rich in milk, be drained for us  
through each succeeding year.2

In the *Kauśika-sūtra* Sītā is the wife of Parjanya, a god associated with rain. She is the “mother of gods, mortals and creatures” \(7c\)3 and is petitioned for growth and prosperity \(6\).4 In the *Parāskara-sūtra* Sītā is the wife of Indra, a god often associated with rain and fertility, and is offered cooked rice and barley in the sacrificial fire \(2.17.1-19\).5 In the *Vājasaneyi-saṁhitā* Sītā is invoked when four furrows are drawn during a sacrificial ritual \(12.69-72\). This is reminiscent of plowing the ground upon which the fire altar is built during the Agnicayana ritual, an act apparently intended to ensure the abundance and fertility of the crops.6 Sītā is also invoked as one of the names of the goddess Āryā in the *Harivaṁśa* \(2.3.14\).

O goddess, you are the altar’s center in the sacrifice,

The priest’s fee,

Sītā to those who hold the plough,

And Earth to all living beings.7

Sītā is not a very significant deity prior to the *Rāmāyaṇa* of Vālmīki. She is not mentioned very often and is overshadowed by much more popular goddesses associated with fertility, such as Śrī-Lakṣmī. Nevertheless, Sītā does seem to be part of a fundamental intuition concerning the fertility of the plowed earth and the necessity of a male power to awaken, arouse, and inseminate her. Underlying Sītā’s connection with Indra, Parjanya, and other male deities associated with the inseminating effects of rain seems to be the basic perception that the ongoing fertility of the cosmos is the result of the interaction between the sky and the earth, between male and female, between the latent powers of the field and the inseminating effects of the plow, which opens the earth for the insertion of seeds into her fertile interior.

## KINGS AND THE FERTILITY OF THE EARTH

Identification of Rāma’s wife with a goddess of the plowed fields, with a goddess of fertility, seems to be related to the central role that kings in ancient India were assumed to play in promoting the fertility of the land.8 The interrelation between fertility and the manly vigor and power of the ruler or king finds its prototype in the *Ṛg-veda,* where the mighty god Indra combats the demon Vṛtra, who withholds the creative, nourishing waters of creation. Indra having defeated the demon, the waters rush forth to fructify the earth and create a fertile, habitable cosmos fit for human civilization.9

The theme of the king’s bringing forth the abundance and fertility of the earth is central in the myths concerning Pṛthu, the first human king. In these myths the necessity of a king is related in part to the chaotic and barren nature of the earth in the mythic past. Prior to Pṛthu’s reign the earth was inhospitable, her terrain was impossible to cultivate, and her fertility remained untapped. The *Mahābhārata* describes Pṛthu as leveling the earth’s mountains and hills to make her fit for agriculture and as milking the earth like a cow \(7.69\). As the legendary model for kings, one of Pṛthu’s chief functions is to bring forth the fertility of the earth. According to the Pṛthu myths, the earth, although fertile and potent, does not or cannot yield the abundance of her interior without being stimulated, activated, or, in the image of the *Mahābhārata,* “milked” by a heroic, royal figure. Conversely, it is understood that the king’s reign will not be fruitful, that he will not be successful, unless he can draw forth the richness of the earth. Just as the king is needed to activate or provoke the earth into life and fertility, so the earth’s fruitfulness is necessary to the king’s success as a ruler.

Certain myths and certain Vedic rituals indicate the theme of the king’s winning the fruits of the earth. In various ways the king relates to, interacts with, or captures things that are related to the earth, such as cows. These acts symbolize the king’s ability to draw forth from the earth her treasures and abundance. They symbolize the king’s ability to “milk” the earth of her richness for the benefit of all living creatures.10

The myth of the churning of the ocean may also be understood in this vein.11 Viṣṇu, as the cosmic ruler in this myth, usually plays the central role and dominates the action in his various forms: as the tortoise that provides the foundation for the churning stick; as the cosmic serpent, Vāsuki, who provides the churning rope; as the seductress Mohinī, who prevents the demons from partaking of the nectar of immortality; and as the leader of the gods. The central action of the myth is the churning of the ocean of milk to make it yield the nectar of immortality. Viṣṇu represents the active ruler who brings his power and ingenuity to bear on the passive fertility of the cosmos. The result of Viṣṇu’s action is the drawing forth of representations of the abundance of the earth. Central among these are the nectar of immortality and the goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī. Śrī represents good luck, well-being, abundance, and fertility and is well known as dwelling wherever a righteous king reigns. She is sovereignty personified, and where she dwells there always exist wealth and abundance of all good things.

The *Rāmāyaṇa* takes care to portray Rāma as the ideal king and his rule as a model of social perfection. It is therefore not surprising that we would encounter the theme of Rāma relating to, interacting with, or winning the riches of the earth. In fact, his winning Sītā at her *svayamvara* \(a suitor’s contest for a bride\), their subsequent marriage, and Rāma’s regaining Sītā from the clutches of the demon Rāvaṇa should probably be understood as an expression of this basic and ancient pattern in Indian religion. It is clear in the *Rāmāyaṇa* that Sītā is no mere human being. Her birth is supernatural, and her abilities and appearance are exalted throughout the text. She is, for example, called *ayonijā,* “not born of a womb” \(1.66; 2.30\), and in appearance she is often likened to Śrī-Lakṣmī \(5.12\).12 The nature of her birth \(as well as her name\) also makes it clear that Sītā fits the theme of the mutual and necessary interaction between a king and the earth, which alone leads to fertility and abundance. According to the *Rāmāyaṇa,* Sītā is literally unearthed when her father, King Janaka, is plowing \(1.66\). Given Janaka’s position as a great king, ruler of Videha, it seems extremely unlikely that he was simply in the fields farming when Sītā was discovered. What is more likely is that Janaka was involved in some royal ritual, part of which involved the king’s plowing the earth to bring about fertility.13 It is also probable that the act of the king’s plowing the field was likened to sexual intercourse, a symbolic coupling of the king \(and the powers he represented or contained\) with the latent powers of the earth.14 The effectiveness of the ritual plowing, then, is manifest in the birth of Sītā, the earth’s personified fertility, abundance, and well-being, which has been brought forth by Janaka.

The marriage of Rāma and Sītā represents a further interplay between a vigorous, virtuous, powerful king and a woman who symbolizes the fecund forces of the earth, a woman who is literally the child of the earth. Their marriage institutes a relationship in which Sītā is, as it were, plowed by Rāma the king. The ultimate result of this auspicious relationship between kingly virility and earthly fertility is the inauguration of Rāmrājya, “the rule of Rāma,” an idealized reign in which harmony, longevity, order, fruitful crops, and all social, political, and economic virtues dominate society to the exclusion of all ills.



Sītā. South Indian bronze, early Choḷa, ca. 1000 A.D. Government Museum, Madras. C. Sivaramamurti, *South Indian Bronzes* \(New Delhi: Lalit Kala Akademi, 1963\), fig. 41. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

Interposed between the marriage of Rāma and Sītā and the inauguration of Rāmrājya is the central part of the epic narrative in which Rāma is banished from the capital city, Sītā is abducted by the villain Rāvaṇa, and Rāma and his allies defeat Rāvaṇa and recapture Sītā. During Rāma’s exile, Ayodhya, the capital of Rāma’s kingdom, is desolate. The citizens bemoan Rāma’s absence, and in all respects the situation is contrasted with the times when Rāma was present there.15 Doubly traumatic is the situation later in the forest when Sītā is kidnapped and separated from Rāma. At one point Rāma is reduced to a blubbering, half-maddened wreck and must be returned to sobriety by the appeals of his brother Lakṣmaṇa, who tells him it is unmanly and improper to lament so.16

In summary, traditional Indian religion viewed the king as a figure who could stimulate, activate, or somehow draw forth from the earth her creative potential. Indeed, it was held that without the king’s beneficial influence, without the manly vigor of the king, the earth’s fecundity would remain untapped; the earth would remain unproductive. The king entered into a relationship with the earth in which he could stimulate her, a relationship that was understood as not unlike a marriage. “This marital relation of the ruler to the earth is directly expressed in the word *Bhupati* ’lord of the earth,’ i.e. king.”17 In the *Rāmāyaṇa* Rāma’s wife is associated with the powers of the earth, or the earth itself, through her name and through her unusual birth. Underlying Sītā’s epic character and personality is the ancient fertility goddess associated with the plowed field, who was worshiped for abundant crops and who was ritually activated by rulers in certain contexts. Sītā, the epic heroine, has ancient roots, and one important dimension of her character associates her with the primordial powers of the earth.

## THE IDEAL WIFE

Sītā is defined in the *Rāmāyaṇa* and in the subsequent cult of Rāma almost entirely in relation to her husband. She is portrayed as the ideal Hindu wife, whose every thought revolves around her husband. For Sītā Rāma is the center of her life. She is always steadfast in her loyalty to him. His welfare, reputation, and wishes are uppermost in her mind. The *Manu-dharma-śāstra* describes the ideal wife as a woman who always remains faithful to her husband, no matter what his character might be: “Though destitute of virtue, or seeking pleasure elsewhere, or devoid of good qualities, a husband must be constantly worshiped as a god by a faithful wife” \(5.154\).18 The same text, commenting on the necessity for protecting women throughout their lives, says: “Her father protects her in childhood, her husband protects her in old age; a woman is never fit for independence” \(9.3\).19 Sītā is the ideal *pativratā,* the wife devoted entirely to her husband. In her selfless devotion and sexual fidelity the *pativratā* nourishes an inner heat that both purifies her and provides her with a destructive weapon that can be used against those who might threaten her purity.20 This inner heat generated as a result of marital fidelity seems to be similar to *tapas* in the context of asceticism. *Tapas* is both the act of doing asceticism, or something virtuous, and the result of doing that action, namely, an inner heat or fire.

Sītā’s mythological role as the ideal wife and *pativratā* is illustrated in several incidents in the *Rāmāyaṇa.* When Rāma is told by his father that he will not inherit the kingdom and that he must go into exile in the forest for fourteen years, he prepares to leave Sītā behind in the city of Ayodhya because he thinks that she could not bear the ordeals and discomforts of the forest. She is grief stricken at this plan and delivers a long discourse to him on her desire to go into exile with him. The point to which she returns often is that a husband is a god to his wife and that apart from him a wife might as well commit suicide, so meaningless would be her existence. She threatens to kill herself unless he relents and allows her to go with him to the forest. She begins her plea with these words:



O Son of an illustrious monarch, a father, a mother, a brother, a son or a daughter-in-law enjoy the fruit of their merits and receive what is their due, a wife alone follows the destiny of her consort, O Bull among Men; therefore, from now on, my duty is clear, I shall dwell in the forest\! For a woman, it is not her father, her son, nor her mother, friends nor her own self, but the husband, who in this world and the next is ever her sole means of salvation. If thou dost enter the impenetrable forest to-day, O Descendant of Raghu, I shall precede thee on foot, treading down the spiky Kusha Grass. . . . I shall willingly dwell in the forest as formerly I inhabited the palace of my father, having no anxiety in the Three Worlds and reflecting only on my duties towards my lord. Ever subject to thy will, docile, living like an ascetic, in those honey-scented woodlands I shall be happy in thy proximity, O Rama, O Illustrious Lord. \(2.27\)21

Rāma replies to her by describing all the dangers and discomforts of the forest and tells her that he cannot bear to inflict these things on her, that she must stay behind in the comfort of the city under the protection of her in-laws. She replies by saying:



The hardships described by thee, that are endured by those who dwell in the forest, will be transmuted into joys through my devotion to thee. . . . separated from thee I should immediately yield up my life. . . . Deprived of her consort a woman cannot live, thou canst not doubt this truth where I am concerned. . . . O Thou of pure soul, I shall remain sinless by following piously in the steps of my consort, for a husband is a God. \(2.29\)22

In her utter loyalty to Rāma she compares herself to Sāvitrī, who followed her husband to the realm of the dead, and says that she has never seen the face of another man, even in her thoughts \(2.30\). She says that the forest discomforts will be enjoyed by her as pleasures as long as she can be with him. She sums up her plea to Rāma by saying: “To be with thee is heaven, to be without thee is hell, this is the truth\!” \(2.30\).23

When Rāvaṇa abducts Sītā and takes her to Laṇka, he keeps her prisoner in a garden surrounded by demonesses. Several long descriptions portray Sītā’s pitiful condition in the absence of Rāma. Through a series of metaphors Vālmīki tries to capture both Sītā’s great beauty and her great grief. The latter has clearly eclipsed the former but cannot altogether hide it. In the words of the *Rāmāyaṇa* she was



resplendent with a radiance which now shone but dimly so that she seemed like a flame wreathed in smoke.

. . . she resembled a lotus pool stripped of its flowers. Oppressed, racked with grief, and tormented, she was like unto Rohini pursued by Ketu. . . .

Entangled in a mighty web of sorrow, her beauty was veiled like a flame enveloped in smoke or a traditional text obscured by dubious interpretation or wealth that is melting away or faith that is languishing or hope that is almost extinguished or perfection unattained on account of obstacles or an intellect which is darkened or fame tarnished by calumny. \(5.15\)24

Musing on her appearance, Hanuman, the loyal monkey ally of Rāma, says: “For a woman the greatest decoration is her lord and Sita, though incomparably beautiful, no longer shines in Rama’s absence” \(5.16\).25

Although her beauty is dimmed, although she lacks the presence of Rāma, who alone gives her life meaning, she is described throughout this section of the narrative as constantly remembering Rāma. Keeping him always in her mind, she is sometimes described as shining beautifully as a result of this steadfastness. “Though that blessed one was shorn of her beauty, yet her soul did not lose its transcendency, upheld as it was by the thought of Rāma’s glory and safeguarded by her own virtue” \(5.17\).26

Rāvaṇa comes to the garden and proposes that Sītā abandon Rāma and take him as her husband. She is shocked at this suggestion and refuses. Rāvaṇa then threatens that he will give her two months to agree to his wishes. If, after that time, she refuses, he will cut her up and have her for breakfast \(5.22\). Sītā shows great pride and courage in the face of Rāvaṇa’s threats. At one point she tells him that if she wished she could burn him to ashes with the fire that she has accumulated from her chastity \(5.22\). She refuses to do so, she says, simply because she has not been given Rāma’s permission.

When Hanuman finds Sītā in her garden prison he proposes to return her to India by carrying her on his back. Given Sītā’s predicament and her longing to see Rāma again, it would be natural for her to accept this offer of rescue joyfully. She does not agree to return with Hanuman, however, because to do so would mean touching another male besides her husband, which would violate her devotion to Rāma. She also refuses to accept Hanuman’s offer because it would mean that Rāma would not obtain the glory involved in rescuing her. Sītā displays in this scene her habit of always thinking of Rāma first. His welfare and reputation are uppermost in her mind. To her it would be wrong to think of her own safety first if it would mean adversely influencing Rāma’s reputation or opportunity for fame and glory \(5.37\).

Rāvaṇa attempts to persuade Sītā to accept him as her new husband by having his court magician create a head that resembles Rāma’s and a bow like Rāma’s. Taking these to Sītā, Rāvaṇa claims that Rāma has been defeated in battle and slain. In her shock and lamentation Sītā’s chief thought is that it must have been some fault of hers which resulted in Rāma’s untimely and undignified death. A virtuous woman sustains her husband and prevents his untimely death. Only some shortcoming or unvirtuous act, she thinks, can explain the tragedy. She begs Rāvaṇa to take her to the body of her husband and slay her there so that she can be united with him in death \(6.31–32\).

After Rāma defeats Rāvaṇa, Sītā’s loyalty to her husband is severely tested. Sītā is brought before Rāma, and she beams with joy at seeing him. He, however, scowls at her and announces that he has only undertaken the defeat of Rāvaṇa in order to uphold his family’s honor and not out of love for her. He says that it would be lustful and ignoble for him to take her back after she had spent time under the control of another man. He disclaims her and even invites her to associate with one of his brothers or one of the surviving demon heroes. He concludes this frosty interview with her by saying: “Assuredly Rāvaṇa, beholding thy ravishing and celestial beauty, will not have respected thy person during the time thou didst dwell in his abode” \(6.17\).27

Sītā is shocked at this accusation and protests her innocence, saying that although it is true that Rāvaṇa handled her, she could have done nothing to prevent it, that he abducted her by means of superior strength, and that throughout her ordeal and stay in Lanka she remained completely faithful to her husband and thought of him constantly. Grieved by Rāma’s false accusations, she asks Lakṣmaṇa to make a funeral pyre for her. Having displeased Rāma and having been renounced by him publicly, she wishes to die \(6.118\). When the fire has been kindled Sītā prepares to enter it by circumambulating Rāma and then addressing Agni, the god of fire, with the words: “As my heart has never ceased to be true to Raghava, do thou, O Witness of all Beings, grant me thy protection\! As I am pure in conduct, though Rāma looks on me as sullied, do thou, O Witness of the Worlds, grant me full protection\!” \(6.118\).28 Because of her innocence and purity, Agni refuses to harm her and returns her to Rāma so unscathed that even her flower garland remains unwithered by the heat of the flames. Rāma, convinced of her purity, accepts her back and says that he will protect her forever \(6.120\).

Back in Ayodhya, however, when everyone is living happily ever after and the glorious era of Rāmrājya is under way, Rāma hears that his citizens are gossiping about Sītā and are unhappy that he accepted her back after she was under Rāvaṇa’s control. To stop this gossip and to set a stainless example for his subjects, Rāma decides to banish Sītā from his kingdom, even though he has just learned of her pregnancy. He commands his brother Lakṣmaṇa to take Sītā to a deserted place and abandon her \(7.45\). When Lakṣmaṇa tells Sītā of Rāma’s decision, her predilection is again to blame some fault of her own, either in this life or a past life, for bringing about her ill luck. She does not blame Rāma, nor does it seem to occur to her that he might be in the wrong \(7.48\). She asks Lakṣmaṇa to send Rāma this message:



O Raghava, thou knowest I am truly pure and that I have been bound to thee in supreme love, yet thou hast renounced me in fear of dishonour, because thy subjects have reproached and censured thee, O Hero. . . . As for me, I am not distressed on mine own account, O Prince of Raghu, it is for thee to keep thy fair name untarnished\! The husband is as a God to the woman, he is her family, and her spiritual preceptor, therefore, even at the price of her life, she must seek to please her lord. \(7.48\)29



The test of Sītā. Kulu, about 1720 A.D. Jagdish and Kamla Mittal Museum of Indian Art, Hyderabad. *In the Image of Man: The Indian Perception of the Universe through 2000 Years of Painting and Sculpture,* Hayward Gallery, London, March 25-June 13, 1982 \(London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1982\), fig. 386, p. 73. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

After Sītā has given birth to twin sons and has spent several years in exile in a forest hermitage, Rāma summons her back to Ayodhya to undergo an ordeal that will absolve him of all shame and demonstrate her innocence once and for all. Although he himself is convinced of her innocence, he demands a public ordeal in order to convince his subjects. Sītā agrees, but it seems that she no longer relishes life; she asks, on the basis of her purity and loyalty to Rāma, to be taken back into the bosom of her mother, the goddess Earth. She says: “If, in thought, I have never dwelt on any but Rāma, may the Goddess Madhavi receive me\!” \(7.97\).30 As she finishes this act of truth, a throne rises from the ground supported by serpents. Earth embraces Sītā, seats her on the throne, and then the throne and Sītā sink back into the ground \(7.97\). Although Rāma angrily demands Sītā’s return, the earth remains silent and closed, and Rāma lives out his life in sorrow. He does not marry again and has a golden image of Sītā made, which he uses in her place at religious rituals requiring the presence of a wife.

Sītā’s self-effacing nature, her steadfast loyalty to her husband, and her chastity make her both the ideal Hindu wife and the ideal *pativratā.* In a sense Sītā has no independent existence, no independent destiny. In all things she sees herself as inextricably bound up with Rāma. Apart from him her life is meaningless. Throughout the *Rāmāyaṇa* she constantly thinks of Rāma and his welfare and always remains faithful to him despite provocations on his part. Although Rāma is considered the ideal king, he is not a very good husband to Sītā. He would be perfectly willing to leave her behind for fourteen years during his exile, he entertains doubts about her chastity while she was under Rāvaṇa’s control, he allows her to undergo an ordeal by fire, he exiles her from his kingdom to stop the gossip of the citizens and to protect his own reputation, and finally he demands that she undergo a public ordeal. Throughout all this Sītā remains steadfast and usually tries to blame herself instead of Rāma for events that cause her suffering and separation from Rāma. In her loyalty and chastity, furthermore, it is understood that she supports and nourishes Rāma’s strength and reputation. A common Hindu belief is that a man is strengthened, indeed, is made nearly invulnerable, by his wife’s chastity, whereas he is weakened and endangered by her faithlessness. Thus when Rāvaṇa shows Sītā Rāma’s head and bow, she immediately blames herself. Although she cannot remember being faithless in act or thought, she assumes that she must have been at some time \(perhaps in a past life\) in order for Rāma to meet such an untimely end. It does not occur to her that some fault of Rāma’s own might have led to his misfortune.

Although in Hinduism there are differing marital-role expectations and traditions concerning where brides are expected to live after marriage, it is generally true that the good woman and ideal wife should express submission and docility to her in-laws. Speaking of the training of girls in Mysore, M. N. Srinivas says:

It is the mother’s duty to train her daughter up to be an absolute docile daughter-in-law. The *summum bonum* of a girl’s life is to please her parents-in-law and her husband. If she does not “get on” with her mother-in-law, she will be a disgrace to her family, and cast a blot on the fair name of her mother. The Kannada mother dins into her daughter’s ears certain ideals which make for harmony \(at the expense of her sacrificing her will\) in her life.31

In the Hindu tradition a woman is taught to understand herself primarily in relation to others. She is taught to emphasize in the development of her character what others expect of her. It is society that puts demands on her, primarily through the agents of relatives and in-laws, and not she who places demands on society that she be allowed to develop a unique, independent destiny. A central demand placed on women, particularly vis-à-vis males, is that they subordinate their welfare to the welfare of others. Hindu women are taught to cultivate an attitude that identifies their own welfare with the welfare of others, especially that of their husbands and children.



In the *bratas,* the periodical days of fasting and prayer which unmarried girls keep all over India, the girl’s wishes for herself are almost always in relation to others; she asks the boons of being a good daughter, good wife, good daughter-in-law, good mother, and so forth. Thus, in addition to the “virtue” of self-effacement and self-sacrifice, the feminine role in India crystallizes a woman’s connections to others, her embeddedness in a multitude of familial relationships.32

In inculcating the nature of the ideal woman in India, Sītā plays an important role, perhaps the dominant role of all Hindu mythological figures. The *Rāmāyaṇa,* either in its original Sanskrit version or in one of several vernacular renditions, is well known by almost every Hindu. Many of the leading characters have come to represent Hindu ideals. In the context of the Daśa Puttal Vrata, for example, Bengali girls wish that “I shall have a husband like Rāma, I shall be *sati* like Sītā, I shall have a Devara \[younger brother-in-law\] like Lakshman. I shall have a father-in-law like Dasaratha; I shall have a mother-in-law like Kousalya.”33

Sītā represents all the qualities of a good woman and ideal wife. Although other goddesses, such as Pārvatī and Lakṣmī, and other heroines from Hindu mythology, such as Sāvitrī and Damayantī, express many of these qualities, Sītā is by far the most popular and beloved paradigm for wifely devotion, forbearance, and chastity.

From earliest childhood, a Hindu has heard Sita’s legend recounted on any number of sacral and secular occasions; seen the central episodes enacted in folk plays like the *Ram Lila;* heard her qualities extolled in devotional songs; and absorbed the ideal feminine identity she incorporates through the many everyday metaphors and similes that are associated with her name. Thus, “She is as pure as Sita” denotes chastity in a woman, and “She is a second Sita,” the appreciation of a woman’s uncomplaining self-sacrifice. If, as Jerome Bruner remarks, “In the mythologically instructed community there is a corpus of images and models that provide the pattern to which the individual may aspire, a range of metaphoric identity,” then this range, in the case of a Hindu woman, is condensed in one model. And she is Sita.34

## IDEAL DEVOTEE AND INTERMEDIARY

After Vālmikī’s *Rāmāyaṇa,* Rāma increasingly ascended to a position of supreme deity for many Hindus. Today in India he is one of the most popular deities and is the recipient of fervent devotion from millions of devotees. The shift in Rāma’s status from that of a human hero or incarnation of Viṣṇu in Vālmikī’s *Rāmāyaṇa* to that of the lord of the worlds is evident in the sixteenth-century Hindi work of Tulsī Dās, the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* an extremely popular devotional work in North India. Although the central narrative remains the same, even in most particulars, Tulsī Dās frequently alters the story in such a way that opportunities are afforded to express devotion to Rāma as the Lord. Throughout the text it is clear that the central point of the narrative is Rāma’s descent to the earth in order to provide his devotees a chance to worship him.35

In the process of Rāma’s elevation to divine supremacy, Sītā also underwent certain changes. Her status becomes similarly elevated when Rāma becomes identified with the highest god. In his poem *Kavitāvalī* Tulsī Dās refers to Sītā as the world’s mother and to Rāma as the world’s father \(1.15\).36 Elsewhere in the poem Rāma and Sītā are praised in fervent, devotional language by village women who see them walking along the road. The two are compared to various divine couples, and the very sight of them has redemptive effects \(2.14–25; 7.36\). In another of Tulsī Dās’s works Rāma and Sītā are worshiped and addressed in devotional tones: “My mind now tells me that save for Rāma’s and Sītā’s feet I shall go nowhere else.”37 In his invocation to his *Rāmcarit-mānas* Tulsī Dās invokes several deities and includes this verse to Sītā: “Hail to Rāma’s own beloved Sita, victor o’er all suff’ring, / Mistress of birth, life, death, and of all happiness the giver.”38 In the popular folk dramas of North India, the Rām Līlās, in which whole villages act out the story of Rāma over the course of several weeks, the actors playing the roles of Rāma and Sītā are worshiped by the spectators as deities.39

Consistent with her role in Vālmīki’s *Rāmāyaṇa* as the ideal wife who subordinates herself to her husband, Sītā never achieves the position of a great, powerful, independent deity. Even compared to such goddesses as Lakṣmī and Pārvatī, who in most respects are portrayed as ideal wives in Hindu mythology, Sītā lacks an identity, power, and will of her own. She remains in Rāma’s shadow to such an extent that she is often hardly visible at all. Sītā is rarely mentioned in such devotional works as Tulsī Dās’s *Kavitāvalī* and *Vinaya-patrikā.* Hanuman and Lakṣmaṇa, in fact, are mentioned more often than she is. And when Rāma’s consort is specified, Tulsī Dās often prefers to identify her as Lakṣmī, not as Sītā.40 In fact, Tulsī Dās expresses devotion more often to Pārvatī and Gaṇgā as goddesses than he does to Sītā.41

In popular Hinduism today Sīta is revered as a deity, and in the numerous Rām Līlā performances throughout the Hindi-speaking area of North India the actor who plays Sītā \(all actors are males\) is worshiped as a deity. But Sītā is rarely worshiped in her own right. It would be very unusual to find a temple dedicated to Sītā alone. In Rāma and Hanuman temples an image of Sītā is installed alongside or between Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, where she receives worship along with her husband and brother-in-law. Though she is honored along with Rāma, it is understood that she is not his equal.

If Sītā does not assume the role of a popular, powerful goddess more or less equal to her husband Rāma, she does play two important roles in the context of devotion to Rāma: the role of intermediary and the role of ideal devotee. Addressing her as world mother, Tulsī Dās petitions Sītā to act as his advocate before Rāma.42 She is not approached directly for divine blessing but as one who has access to Rāma, who alone dispenses divine grace. Again, consistent with her subordinate position vis-à-vis Rāma in the *Rāmāyaṇa,* consistent with her role as one who always subordinates her will to his, Sītā here acts primarily as a messenger between Rāma and his devotees. In her loyalty and devotion she has gained the Lord’s ear, and because of this she is sometimes approached by his devotees for help in seeking Rāma’s favor.

Sītā also assumes the role of devotee in the later Rāma cult and thus assumes a place as model to Rāma’s devotees. Although Hanuman is the most popular model of Rāma devotion in the later Rāma cults, Sītā is often pictured as an ardent devotee. In the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* for example, she is typically pictured as intoxicated by the appearance of Rāma and steadfastly devoted to him. Indeed, in the *Rāmcarit-mānas* Tulsī Dās has sometimes altered the narrative in such a way as to emphasize Sītā’s devotion and love for Rāma. For example, in the Vālmikī *Rāmāyaṇa* Sītā pleads to accompany Rāma to the forest by appealing to law and custom. She argues that a wife’s duty is to be with her husband. In the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* however, Rāma and others argue that religious custom and law dictate that she should stay behind and take care of her in-laws. Backing up these arguments are other reasons why she should stay behind, including the argument that someone as delicate as STta could not endure the difficulties of the forest life. Sītā’s reply does not dwell on the social norm that a wife always be with her husband, as in the Vālmīki *Rāmāyaṇa,* but on the unbearable agony that separation from her husband will inflict. It is not her sense of duty but her love for and devotion to Rāma which give Sītā’s plea its force and passion in the *Rāmcarit-mānas.43*

Sītā’s role as devotee, like her role as intermediary, casts her in a subsidiary positon vis-à-vis Rāma. He is the supreme deity, the object of devotion; she is the ideal devotee, the model for the human devotee. Wifely devotion has here become a metaphor for ideal devotion to God.




