+++
title = "13 VILLAGE GODDESSES"

+++





India today is primarily a village culture. The majority of Hindus live in villages of under a hundred thousand people, and there is little doubt that this has always been the case in the Indian subcontinent. In the context of village life one of the most \(if not the most\) significant and powerful divine presences is the *grāmadevatā*, a deity who is especially identified with the village and toward whom the villagers often have a special affection. It is not uncommon, in fact, for there to be several *grāmadevatās* in a village, each of whom may have a specialized function.1 These village deities, more numerous than Indian villages themselves, are naturally diverse in character. Their names alone suggest diverse characteristics and functions.2 Some of these deities have a regional reputation, or at least the name of a certain *grāmadevatā* will be well known or popular throughout an entire region. The goddesses Māriyamman in South India and Manasā in North India are examples of this regional popularity. Other village deities may be known only to one small village. The goddess Periyapālayattamman, whose name means simply “the mother \(or mistress\) of the village Periyapālayam,” is relatively unknown outside that village near Madras in South India.3 Often the village deity will share the names or epithets of deities from the Sanskrit pantheon and will be identified with these deities in the minds of villagers. But this does not necessarily mean that the village deity will bear many similarities to the “great” god in question. It may indicate little more than a conscious attempt to relate the village deity to a wider religious universe or to make the local deity recognizable to curious outsiders. In most cases where such an identification exists the *grāmadevatā* differs markedly from the “great” deity with whom it shares a name.4

Despite the number and variety of *grāmadevatās*, several typical characteristics of these local deities have been noted. First, they usually are female. Speaking of South India, Henry Whitehead says that *“village deities*, with very few exceptions, *are female*. . . . All over Southern India . . . the village deities are almost exclusively female. In the Tamil country, it is true, most of them have male attendants, who are supposed to guard the shrines and carry out the commands of the goddesses; but their place is distinctly subordinate and almost servile.”5

Second, these deities are usually not represented by anthropomorphic images. They are usually represented by uncarved stones, trees, or small shrines that do not contain an anthropomorphic image. Sometimes no shrine is present at all except during special festivals, when temporary structures will be built to house or represent the deity.6

Third, these deities, goddesses for the most part, capture the primary interest of the villagers and tend to be worshiped with more intensity than the great gods of the Hindu pantheon. Although the great gods are acknowledged to be in charge of distant, cosmic rhythms, they are only of limited interest to most villagers, many of whom traditionally were not allowed within the precincts of the temples of these deities in the first place. The village goddess, in contrast, engages the villagers directly by being associated with their local, existential concerns.7 She is perceived to be *their* deity and to be concerned especially with *their* well-being and that of their village.

Finally, these village deities are often directly associated with disease, sudden death, and catastrophe. When the village is threatened by disaster, particularly epidemics, the local goddess is usually said to be manifesting herself. She erupts onto the village scene along with diasters that threaten the stability, and even the survival, of the village. Furthermore, her role vis-à-vis such epidemics or disasters is ambivalent. She is perceived both as inflicting these diseases and as protecting the village from them.

## THE LOCAL ROOTEDNESS OF THE VILLAGE GODDESSES

One of the most persistent themes found in the myth, cult, and worship of village goddesses is their being rooted in specific, local villages. The village is the special place of the deity. She is the mother or mistress of the village, as suggested by a name popular in the South, Amman, meaning “mother, mistress, or lady.”8 Although it is common to speak of the goddess of such-and-such a village, it is probably more accurate to think of the village as belonging to the goddess. Theologically the village goddess predates the village. She created it. As its center and source she is often associated with a “navel stone” located somewhere in the village.9 Sometimes she is represented only by a head placed directly on the ground. This may suggest that her body is the village itself, that she is rooted in the soil of the village.10 The village and the villagers might be understood as living within or upon the body of the village goddess.

The close identity of the goddess with her village is also seen in her role as guardian of the village’s boundaries. Her shrines or symbols are often erected at the boundaries of the village, where she acts to protect it from invasions of evil spirits and outsiders in general. Another expression of the intimate identity of the goddess with her village is her symbolic marriage to representatives of the village during her ceremonies.11 Although the goddess is sometimes said to have a husband or a male consort or guardian, her real associate in a marriagelike arrangement is the village itself rather than a male deity. The two, the goddess and the village, are tied to each other, dependent on each other; in short, they are married to each other and nourish each other.

Another indication of the identity of village and goddess is the participation of almost all members of a village in the goddess’s festivals. In the case of the high or great gods, worship is often restricted to certain castes, usually the higher ones, or such deities may be particularly worshiped by *sampradāyas* or movements that have restricted membership. The village goddess, however, is approached by the natural grouping of the local village itself and all those who constitute it. She is the goddess of the whole village, the physical place as well as the social and economic organism. Nearly all castes are represented at her festivals and to some extent mix freely. Her worship is a community effort, although particular castes may play more important ritual roles than others.12 The extent of the all-inclusive nature of local-goddess worship in villages is indicated by the participation of Brahmans and Muslims in these festivals.13 The point is that the local goddess is not so much a Hindu deity or a deity specially related to a caste or occupation, or even to a specific phenomenon such as disease, although all of these things might be the case to some extent. The point is that from the villagers’ point of view the goddess is specifically their deity, their lady, as it were, who has their particular needs at heart.

The local rootedness of village goddesses, their special and narrow association with particular villages, is also suggested in the tendency during festivals in their honor to exclude outsiders. The exclusion of outsiders seems to be associated with the idea that they might benefit from the power of the goddess, which is intended for the local village. Her power is believed to be for her village, not for outsiders. Sometimes, too, the symbol or image of a disease or epidemic will be escorted to the border of a village and symbolically passed on to another village.14 The village and its immediate surroundings thus represent for the villager a more or less complete cosmos within which life in all its fullness and complexity can be lived out in an orderly and fruitful way. The central divine power impinging on or underlying this cosmos is the village goddess, and the extent to which order and fertility dominate the village cosmos is bound up with the relationship between the goddess and the villagers. Village life is her business and their business, and the role of outsiders is sometimes seen to be irrelevant or disruptive.

The basic relationship between the village goddess and her village seems quite straightforward. In return for the worship of the villagers the goddess ensures good crops, timely rain, fertility, and protection from demons, diseases, and untimely death. The arrangement is a local one with little or no room for outsiders. The power of the goddess does not extend beyond the village, so villagers leave her jurisdiction and protection when they venture beyond it. The relationship is localized and aims not so much at individual welfare as the welfare of the whole.

In fact, relations between village goddesses and their villages are more complicated. This is made clear by the association of these goddesses with disease and disruption, an identification that gives them an ambivalent character. For these goddesses are not usually peaceful, benign, and calm presences. Rather, they tend to be wild, rambunctious, independent, demanding, and destructive in their habits. This is evident in both their mythology and their ceremonies.

## MYTHOLOGICAL THEMES

An important theme in myths concerning the origin of village goddesses is the injustice done to women by men. Two of the best-known myths concerning the origin of the popular goddess Māriyamman in South India include this motif. In one version a young Brahman girl is courted by and eventually married to an untouchable who has disguised himself as a Brahman. On discovering the trick, the woman becomes furious and kills herself. She is transformed into a goddess and in her divine form punishes the untouchable by burning him to ashes or otherwise humiliating or humbling him.15 Another version of Māriyamman’s origin identifies her with an extremely pious, pure wife who is married to a devout holy man. She is so pure that she can perform miraculous tasks such as making jars out of loose sand and boiling water simply by placing a pot of water on her head. One day, however, she sees two *gandharvas* making love and feels envy for them. Thereupon she loses her miraculous powers. Discovering this and suspecting sexual disloyalty, her husband commands their son to kill his mother. The son obeys his father and decapitates his mother. Eventually she is restored to life, but in the process her head and body get transposed with those of an untouchable woman. Māriyamman is thus understood to have a Brahman head and an untouchable body, which is significant in terms of both her ambivalent nature and her role as a village goddess exemplifying the social status quo in which Brahmans are at the head of the social system.16

Myths concerning the origins of other village goddesses also include this motif of injustice done to women by males. Kaṇṇagi, the heroine of the Tamil epic *Śilappadihāram*, is portrayed as faultlessly faithful to her husband despite his lecherous and unfaithful behavior. Ordinarily Kaṇṇagi’s faithfulness would guarantee the well-being and long life of her husband, for according to folk tradition a wife’s faithfulness ensures her husband’s welfare, whereas her unfaithfulness causes him harm. If a man’s wife is faithful, he is virtually immune from harm—such is the belief promulgated in both the folk and Sanskrit traditions. Kaṇṇagi’s husband, however, is unjustly accused by the king of Madurai of having stolen an anklet and is executed. Kaṇṇagi proves her husband’s innocence, tears off her breast, which becomes blistering hot, and burns the city of Madurai in her wrath. She subsequently becomes a goddess.17 Again we see the theme of a woman who has been treated unjustly by males expressing her outrage in an act of violent destruction and being transformed into a goddess.

Another set of myths relating the origin of village goddesses takes place entirely in the divine sphere but contains a similar theme. In the beginning is the great goddess Ammavaru. In her desire to create she produces three eggs, from which are born the three great gods: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. When she wants to marry these deities to promote the continuation of creation, they refuse, saying that it would be improper for a mother to have sex with her sons. But one or the other of the gods finally agrees to marry her if she will give him her middle eye, which is symbolic of her primordial power. She agrees, but having given up her power to the god she is destroyed by him. From her body are created the many *śaktis* who become village goddesses.18

These myths, with their theme of village goddesses’ having suffered injustices at the hands of men, help us to understand certain central characteristics of village goddesses: namely, the fiercely ambivalent nature of these goddesses, which manifests itself in sudden outbursts of rage, and the goddesses’ relative independence from or superiority over male consorts. Such goddesses’ terrible retributive wrath continues to be expressed in festivals in which a male animal, often identified as a “husband,” is sacrificed. These goddesses are angry deities and need appeasing. Furthermore, they rarely provide a traditional model for women in their relationships with males. The village goddesses are often not married at all, and if they are, they dominate their male consorts—the reverse of what sexual roles should be according to Indian cultural models.19 It could be said of these fiercely independent goddesses that they have “learned their lesson,”20 that they have learned that they only receive injustice from males; consequently they are determined to remain independent from men in their transformed positions as goddesses. This theme of the goddesses’ using and abusing males is suggested at certain points in local-goddess festivals. The goddesses still need males to invigorate them, but they ensure that the males will not dominate them or threaten their powers. At the end of the festival, in fact, it is not uncommon for the male to be symbolically destroyed, humiliated, or cast out of the village.

Another kind of mythical theme that emphasizes the village goddesses’ independence appears in the stories concerning Kaṉṉiyākumari. Kaṉṉiyākumari is prohibited from marrying Śiva for various reasons. Although she is described as distressed at being prevented from enjoying Śiva as her husband, the myths underline Kaṉṉiyākumari’s perpetual virginity and her formidable power. Her great power seems to be directly related to her unmarried state and her celibacy. In the context of Tamil culture a woman’s virginity, through which she withholds her sexual energy, is more or less equivalent to the building up of *tapas* in males when they retain their semen, which is magically transformed into powerful heat.21 Quite simply, Kaṉṉiyākumari is much more powerful as an unmarried maiden than she would be as a married woman. Although reluctantly unmarried, her independence from males gives her great power.

The great power possessed by goddesses and females who are independent of males is also a theme in many myths current in South India in which female deities are subjugated or tamed by gods. Probably the two best-known examples of this theme feature Mīnākṣī, the goddess enshrined in Madurai, and the fiercely wild goddess Kālī. In the mythology concerning Mīnākṣī the goddess is born with three breasts. Her disconcerted parents are instructed to raise the child like a male. She is brought up like a boy and ascends her father’s throne when he dies. She then undertakes a campaign to subdue the entire world. She and her armies are invincible in battle until she comes to Mount Kailasa and challenges Śiva himself. Seeing Śiva, Mīnākṣī’s entire character is transformed. She becomes shy, and “as soon as she caught sight of him, her third breast disappeared, and, overcome with modesty, innocence, and shyness, she began to scrape the ground shyly with her toe.”22 And so Śiva reduces the powerful battle queen to a shy maiden and eventually subservient wife.

Kālī is subdued in a dance contest. In her independent form she is described as powerful, destructive, bloodthirsty, and fearsome. When she disrupts the meditation of one of Śiva’s devotees or otherwise attracts Śiva’s attention, he challenges her to a contest in which he tames her by defeating her in dance. Thereafter she is said to be his wife or to take on a benign form that becomes widely worshiped. In effect, she loses her power and becomes a weak, helpless female. “Kālī acknowledged defeat; shyly . . . she worshiped the lord; she stood helplessly like a puppet, confused.”23

It has been argued that goddesses in Hindu mythology are generally portrayed as dangerous, violent, and aggressive if they are unmarried and as docile, obedient, and calm if they are married.24 This reinforces social norms by suggesting that it is necessary for women to marry and express their sexuality in “safe” ways and under male supervision and authority. In the human realm marriage is assumed not only to complete a woman but to tame her, channeling her dangerous sexual energy in acceptable ways. The god or the male is seen as a civilizing, calming, ordering presence. Alone, goddesses and women are perceived as powerful and dangerous.

The myths and cults of village goddesses, however, often cast males in disruptive roles and equate the village goddess with the civilized, orderly, and refined realm of the village. Outside the village is the jungle: wild, raw, and chaotic. The village goddess represents the order of the cultivated field and the security of hearth and home. She is preeminently the being who protects the village from attacks by wild, unstable, demonic spirits from the uncivilized outer world. Those demons, furthermore, are often said to be male, and Śiva himself, the deity of the Sanskrit pantheon most commonly associated with village goddesses as a consort, is well known to live on the periphery of civilization, to associate with demons, and in general to have disruptive, antisocial habits. The pattern of associating a goddess with the village, order, and civilization, on the one hand, and her male consort or counterpart with the jungle, on the other hand, is quite common in the central provinces. “The chief deity of the central provinces is Dārni Deotā, ‘earth, the deity’; her husband and companion, Bhātarsi Deotā, is a god of the hunt, related to Śiva, the archer, lord of the wild beasts and the jungle.”25

While goddesses from the larger tradition are often assumed to be dangerous and wild when unmarried or independent from male deities, a central theme in the village-goddess cults is the association of independent female deities with the stability and order of the village. The village goddesses usually avoid both the extreme of the docile, shy, obedient married female and the extreme of the wild, frenzied, dangerous Kālī who is a threat to civilized order. The combination of the village goddesses’ power and fierceness with their protectiveness of the well-being, stability, and order of their villages is beneficial. As the protector of the village the goddess *must* be powerful in view of the dangerous forces that threaten it. No shy, retiring, docile female could successfully protect the village. Although the village goddess may be dangerous because of her great power, for the most part that strength is directed against threatening forces from outside.

## FESTIVALS

Although the village goddesses are typically characterized as protecting, ordering, and instituting village civilization, they also have a reputation for behaving in disruptive, violent, and dangerous ways, particularly during festivals held in their honor. This is particularly clear during festivals in honor of village goddesses during epidemics. Many village goddesses are specifically associated with diseases, and during epidemics they may play several apparently contradictory roles. They may defend the village from the disease, which may be identified with invading demons. They may be identified with the disease itself. Or they may be cast in the dual role of inflicter of the disease and protector from the disease. In whichever role, village goddesses during these festivals reveal an awesome, disruptive, violent aspect. Like the disease itself, the village goddess seems to erupt on the scene, to wake up from a state of quiescence to a state of frenzied activity. During an epidemic, or during her festival, which often coincides with an epidemic, the village goddess forces herself on the awareness of the villagers.26

The goddess’s presence is as immediate, as real, and as disruptive and threatening as the disease that attacks the village. In fact, the two usually are inextricably related. In the case of Śītalā, the North Indian goddess associated with smallpox, the disease is said to be her “grace.” Except in times of smallpox epidemics, Śītalā is quiet, withdrawn, perhaps beyond human ken.27 Traditionally, village-goddess festivals were not undertaken regularly or routinely, although this seems to be the increasing pattern in some places today. Festivals were only held and the goddesses were only worshiped when some disaster, usually an epidemic, struck the village. Such disasters are taken to represent either the presence of demons in the village because the goddess’s defenses have broken down or the anger of the awakened goddess, who is demanding worship by punishing her people for neglecting her for so long.28 From either point of view, or from both points of view simultaneously, during the festival the village is overcome with the immediate presence of the goddess. At this time she makes herself unmistakably known, particularly in the fever of disease victims and in those she possesses.

The theme of the relationship of an epidemic or a disaster to the invasion of the village by hostile demons from outside echoes the mythic theme of the goddess’s abuse by males. In the festival context the goddess confronts and overcomes the demons, and in this struggle she is helped by the villagers. While the villagers are struck down and overcome by the demons and suffer fever and sometimes death, the goddess too is said to become possessed, afflicted, or somehow invaded by the demons. Both she \(in the form of her image\) and the villagers afflicted by the epidemic are cooled with water and other substances, and in cooling one victim it is understood that the other is treated as well. It is as if the two are suffering the invasion of the village together. It is not necessarily a contradiction of this point of view to say that the goddess also causes the epidemic. She receives the main brunt of the onslaught, but she is unable, or unwilling, to contain it all and spreads it to the villagers, who help her deal with it. It is well known that the goddess in this situation is particularly partial to the victims of disease, perhaps because they help her bear the burden of the demonic attack.29

Perhaps the central dramatic event of village-goddess festivals is a blood sacrifice. This sacrifice also may be understood from two points of view. The sacrifice may be seen as a gift from the villagers with which they hope to appease the goddess so that she will withdraw her anger, which expresses itself in the form of the heat of disease. Or the sacrifice may be understood as representing the defeat of the invading demon or demons, who are also associated with the goddess’s consort/husband who had afflicted or abused her in the myths. In either case, it is clear that the goddess demands the blood of a victim, that she needs that blood, either to appease her wrath or to invigorate her in her contest with the demons.

The elaborate, ritualistic way in which the sacrificial victim is treated during the sacrifice suggests his humiliation by the goddess. This in turn suggests that the victim is the goddess’s enemy and thus represents an invading demon or her offending husband/consort. Traditionally, a buffalo was offered to the goddess. After it was beheaded, its leg was thrust into its mouth, fat from its stomach was smeared over its eyes, and a candle was lit on its head and then presented to the goddess. The humiliation of the victim is fairly clear here30 and certainly suggests the defeat of an enemy, presumably the demon who caused the disaster or epidemic.

Although the themes of conflict, struggle, defeat, and death are obviously prominent in these goddess festivals, there is also the theme of the goddess’s being awakened, aroused, and stimulated. Indeed, there is the suggestion that she may even have sexual intercourse with the demon or demons who invade her village.31 A likely implication is that the goddess periodically needs this encounter with a demon/husband/consort to invigorate and enliven her. The festival also has an invigorating, enlivening effect on the village and its occupants. To a great extent, the villagers identify themselves with the goddess in her encounter with the invading demons. Like her and with her, they are aroused, invaded, and assaulted by these “outside” forces that disrupt the calm and order of their world.

During the festival the village as a whole, or at least those who are participating most actively in the worship, appear to abandon the quiet, orderly habits of everyday life. There is a stirring up of everything, a mixing up of things.32 There is often a mixture of castes, demons are present in the village, blood is spilled in sacrificial offerings, people are awakened, aroused by both the epidemic and the festival it has occasioned. Reversal of roles often takes place, or at least social roles and rules are temporarily held in abeyance.33 The village is awakened to the presence of sacred power, to the affirmation that a sacred power underlies and pervades the village. Morbidity is overcome, and the village organism is reactivated and reenlivened by the immediate presence of the goddess.34

The village-goddess festival is often the time of undertaking heroic vows, which greatly heighten the aroused state of the village. Fire walking, carrying burning pots on one’s head, and swinging while suspended on hooks through one’s flesh are all common during these festivals and are associated with trance and possession. These ordeals invite the presence of the goddess by expressing the devotee’s willingness to fully encounter the dangerous power of the goddess, who is aroused, hot, and fierce. While there is considerable risk involved in so encountering the goddess, it is understood that the ordeal is undertaken in gratitude for her blessing in the past or her mercy in the present and that she is particularly fond of those who so approach her and will usually see that no harm will come to them. In return for villagers’ taking on a part of her excess fury or heat generated by contact with demons, the goddess blesses her devotees by protecting them during their ordeal.35 Together, as it were, the goddess and her devotees take on the dangerous but invigorating presence of the epidemic or disaster.

A striking illustration of the enlivening effects of the festival on the goddess and the village is the role played in many festivals in the South by a low-caste woman called a Mātaṅgī. The Mātaṅgīs are unmarried and hold their office for life. During a festival for the village goddess the Mātaṅgī represents the goddess. Possessed by the goddess, she will dance wildly, use obscene language, drink intoxicants, spit on spectators, and push people around with her backside. She seems to take special delight in abusing members of the high castes.



As she rushes about spitting on those who under ordinary circumstances would almost choose death rather than to suffer such pollution from a Madiga \[the low caste from which the woman comes\], she breaks into wild, exulting songs, telling of the humiliation to which she is subjecting the proud caste people. She also abuses them all thoroughly, and . . . they appear to expect it and not to be satisfied without a full measure of her invective.36

An inversion of the usual social codes and rules takes place here.37 The Mātaṅgī personifies social topsy-turvy. Completely unrefined, bursting with raw energy and coarse humor, and intoxicated on country liquor, she is the goddess herself: “. . . willful, impetuous, violent, irrepressible, she exults in her own aliveness and the tumult she arouses.”38

As Victor Turner has argued, religious festivals often serve the important purpose of allowing a society, culture, or village to step out of the confines of normality so that other, often redemptive, possibilities may be glimpsed or briefly experienced or experimented with. Festivals provide a window to what Turner calls the liminal dimension of reality, the dimension that remains outside social norms and expectations but that is capable of enlivening and nourishing the realm of social order and normality.39 Festivals provide a context for the breaking out of confining social roles, for the breaking up and mixing up of expected social relations. The Mātaṅgī dramatically acts out this liminal facet of the village-goddess festival and makes it clear that it is the goddess herself who incites and arouses her devotees to this invigorating frenzy. Having been aroused herself by the encounter with a demon/husband/consort, she in turn arouses the entire village, and together they are renewed and renourished.40 Villagers say that in the topsy-turvy context of the festival, where reversals are dominant, the outrageous behavior of the Mātaṅgī, ordinarily highly polluting, is purifying. Instead of avoiding her spittle and insults, people go out of their way to be subjected to her abuse.41

## DEATH, DISEASE, AND AMBIVALENCE

The close association of village, local, and regional goddesses with disease, epidemic, disaster, and sudden death deserves further comment. Because the village goddesses institute, nourish, and protect villages, it would make sense to interpret their myth, cult, and worship as primarily revolving around their periodic struggles with invading demons who bring sickness, death, and disruption to the villages. Yet given the overwhelming association of these goddesses with the diseases themselves, given the common identification of epidemics with the goddesses’ “grace,” it would make sense to interpret their worship as primarily the attempt to propitiate them so that they will withhold their wrath from their people. Unfortunately, neither point of view alone does justice to the facts, namely, that the goddesses are cast in two contrasting roles: \(1\) guardians of the village and \(2\) the cause and source of disease and sudden death that threaten the existence of the village. Richard Brubaker sums up the ambivalent nature of the village goddesses this way:



Thus the goddess is the one who manifests herself in epidemic disease, who guards against it and keeps it at bay, who inflicts it upon her people in wrath, who joins her people in fighting and conquering it, who suffers it herself; she it is who invites its appearance and then struggles against it; she enters people’s bodies by means of it, but sometimes heals them by taking it upon herself; she uses it as a means to enhance her own worship; she is enflamed by its heat and needs to be cooled, and may be cooled by the fanning of disease-heated humans, while the latter may also be cooled by pouring water on her image; she is both the scourge and the mistress of disease demons, and perhaps even their mistress in both senses of the term; she mercilessly chastizes her people with the disease, but holds its victims especially dear; she delights in the disease, is aroused by it, goes mad with it; she kills with it and uses it to give new life.42

The ultimate mystery and potency of these village/disease goddesses may well lie precisely in the fact that their ambivalent natures are not capable of being comprehended rationally. That the patron deity of a village who is its founder and protector should also assault that village with devastating epidemics seems to suggest a depth of irrationality beyond logical analysis. Nonetheless, some scholars such as Victor Turner have argued that the ongoing well-being of a society and culture depends on its being able to participate periodically in chaos, disorder, and tumult. Religious ritual and festival are the traditional means by which this is done.43 Another scholar puts the case in similar terms: “The festival rite utilizes the potency of disorder. It harnesses the disorder of the ‘other mind,’ possession, trance, dreams, ecstasy . . . ; if these powers are harnessed properly, the society recovers a special potency from chaos beyond the limits of order.”44

Speaking of shamanic initiation, another scholar applies this logic to the individual level:



Thus the shaman’s initiatory experience is represented as an involuntary surrender to disorder, as he is thrust protesting into the chaos which the ordered and controlled life of society strives so hard to deny, or at least to keep at bay. No matter how valiantly he struggles, disorder eventually claims him and marks him with the brand of a transcendental encounter. At its worst, in peripheral cults, this is seen as a baneful intrusion of malign power. At its best, in central possession religions it represents a danger-laden exposure to the powers of the cosmos. In both cases the initial experience withdraws the victim from the secure world of society and of ordered existence, and exposes him directly to those forces which, though they may be held to uphold the social order, also ultimately threaten it.

. . . The shaman is not the slave, but the master of anomaly and chaos. . . . Out of the agony of affliction and the dark night of the soul comes literally the ecstasy of spiritual victory. In rising to the challenge of the powers which rule his life and by valiantly overcoming them in this crucial initiatory rite which reimposes order on chaos and despair, man reasserts his mastery of the universe and affirms his control of destiny and fate.45

Village goddesses, in their association with disease, sudden death, and other realities that threaten the stability or even the existence of the village system, might be understood as instigating society’s confrontation with the chaotic, demonic, disruptive dimensions of life, particularly in the context of festivals, when the village goddesses are fully aroused. From this confrontation a new, more vigorous, more durable order might be won. The very ambivalence of these goddesses heightens their effectiveness in this role. They, like the diseases so often associated with them, are unpredictable in their moods. They erupt onto the scene suddenly, always powerfully and undeniably, and usually dangerously. Manasā, the North Indian goddess associated with snakes,46 strikes suddenly and usually fatally and in so doing violently introduces terrifying chaos into the lives of those who are affected. Suddenly, unmistakably, the fragility of existence is underlined, and the normality of ordered, civilized village life is called into question. Similarly, Śītalā and Māriyamman, both of whom are associated with smallpox, remind people that their tightly ordered worlds may be reduced to chaos at any moment. To pay attention to such goddesses, however, is to make one’s view of reality less fragile, less prone to being shattered by sudden death.47



Manasā, goddess of snakes. A painted pottery image. Contemporary, Bengal. Sudhansu Kumar Ray, *The Ritual Art of the Bratas of Bengal* \(Calcutta: Firma K. L. Mukhoipadhyay, 1961\), plate xiv.

The Bengali goddess Śītalā’s presence in the form of smallpox48 is referred to as her “grace” or play. Edward Dimock suggests that this grace might be understood as her ability to permit people a wider vision of reality. Normal human consciousness tends to impose a diachronic scheme on events whereby a limited, controlled, sequential angle of vision dominates the individual’s perception of reality. Sickness, death, disease, and suffering generally seem to come and go, according to this way of viewing things. There are good times, and there are bad times, and the bad times are for the most part forgotten or repressed. A synchronic view of reality, however, in which past, present, and future are collapsed, in which sequential time is seen to be a mere construct, superimposes the whole range of human events—blessings, tragedies, good times, and bad times—on one another so that they may be viewed simultaneously. In this view the bad times are always with us. Disease, death, and disaster are endemic in good times, and vice versa. The goddess Sitala, in her periodic visitations in which the bad times become epidemic, reminds people that only a synchronic vision of life comes close to reality.49 “By hearing of suffering, by realising the extent of human frailty, one with the eyes to see may be spared the necessity of more particular pain. Śītalā allows us cognition of our position in the universe. . . . Her grace is that she allows us restitution in return for the understanding of her constant presence.”50 To worship Śītalā, to pay attention to what she represents, is to provide oneself with a more realistic, less fragile view of life, which in turn makes the inevitable outbursts of disease or tragic occurrences less devastating.




