+++
title = "APPENDIX IVC"

+++




The historian of Hindu religion must resist two temptations when faced with interpreting the data of the Indus Valley civilization. The first temptation is to say very little. The second temptation, the one that most scholars have chosen, is to say too much. The proper approach to the materials, I think, is to try to interpret them in their own context and not to seek interpretive keys from other cultures, such as those of the ancient Near East or the subsequent Indian tradition, unless overwhelming parallels can be demonstrated.

In reflecting on the history of goddess worship in the Hindu tradition, one has to acknowledge that the impressive data available in the Indus Valley civilization and in neighboring Baluchistan cultures may bear on such a history. While it is speculation to call these cultures Hindu, the presence of such evidence of goddess worship in the Indian subcontinent at such an early period surely deserves some comment. It also deserves comment because other scholars, a bit uncritically, I think, have traced the source of goddess worship in the Hindu tradition to the Indus Valley civilization.

What is the evidence, and what are we to make of it? We have evidence of three peasant cultures, centered in villages west of the Indus Valley in Baluchistan, which probably predate the Indus Valley culture itself. Two of these cultures, the Zhob Valley and the Kulli cultures, dating back to the third millennium B.C.E., have yielded female figurines. The Kulli figurines, which are earlier than the Zhob, are only shown from the waist up. They are heavily adorned with jewelry, and their heads and faces are pinched and somewhat resemble a hen’s head. The faces are not clearly depicted, and the figurines thus have a somewhat anonymous look to them. Unlike the Indus Valley figures, their hair is not elaborate, and their breasts are not accented or exaggerated. The female figurines from the Zhob Valley in northern Baluchistan are also only shown from the waist up. They do not wear as much jewelry as the Kulli figures, but their hair is more elaborately depicted and arranged. The most dramatic feature of the Zhob figures is the face. The faces all have large eyes that are hollow or bulbous, slit mouths, and fairly prominent noses. The breasts of the Zhob figures, though more clearly emphasized than those of the Kulli figurines, are not exaggerated either.1

Although there are similarities between these figures and the figurines from the Indus Valley civilization \(for example, the emphasis on jewelry and the elaborate coiffures of the Zhob specimens\), the peasant-culture figures are distinctively different from the Indus Valley examples and should be discussed in their own right. While cultural contact between these cultures and the Indus Valley culture is quite likely, it cannot be shown to have been overwhelming, and the figurines of the peasant cultures may have meant something quite different from what the figurines in the city culture of the plains meant. Because of the dissimilarities in appearance, then, I will treat the Kulli and Zhob figurines independently from the remains of the greater culture of the plains.

Little, indeed, can be said about what these female figures might have represented. It is even something of a conjecture to suggest that they were images of goddesses. The flat bases might imply that the figures were meant to be set up, perhaps for worship. The nudity of the figures calls attention to their female physiology, but this physiology is not unduly accented. If these figures did represent goddesses, it is difficult to say what these goddesses might have been like and what functions they fulfilled or what truths they revealed on the basis of their sex. The elaborate jewelry might suggest that they were adored with gifts; it also might imply high rank or simply suggest the usual costume of the peasant women. It is impossible to say. The unusual faces, although striking, also present us with no clear indication of who these figures might have been. On the one hand, the anonymity might call our attention to the sex of the figures rather than to their “personalities.” On the other hand, the faces might simply be the result of crude craftmanship or artistic stylization. Most interpreters of the Zhob Valley figurines have said that the faces portray negative qualities. One of the heads somewhat resembles a skull. One scholar, for example, says the type of figurine found in the Zhob Valley “is clearly intended to inspire horror and can hardly fail to remind us of the terrible and loathly images of the malignant Kali of which these figurines may be taken to be an early prototype.”2

While I agree that the faces perhaps have grotesque overtones, I am not sure that they were intended to inspire horror or any other negative emotion. Again, the large eyes and small mouths simply may have been stylized and may have had no malign significance for the artists. In any case, I consider it unjustified to conclude that we have here a prototype of the Hindu goddess Kālī. None of the Zhob figurines has any particular similarities to images of Kālī, and no association with burial or cremation has been established by scholars seeking to interpret these early figures. If these Zhob “goddesses” were clearly associated with funeral ceremonies or burial or cremation grounds, then perhaps one might postulate an association with the much later goddess Kālī. But even then it would be a weak association insofar as Kālī’s function and meaning are not nearly exhausted in terms of her role as mistress of the cremation ground.

I am forced to yield to the first temptation mentioned above and say next to nothing about what these figurines might imply in relation to the later Hindu tradition. All one can justifiably conclude is that there is evidence of goddess figurines in two peasant cultures in the hills of Baluchistan in the second or perhaps late third millennium B.C.E. Insofar as male figures are lacking, one might go further and suggest that if these figurines represent goddesses, their religion, whatever it might have been, was more open to the divine or the sacred as revealed through women than through men and that this might have had something to do with the fertility of the crops. Again, the figurines do not seem to accentuate or exaggerate feminine physiology or the biologically creative role of females.

In moving from the Zhob Valley and Kulli cultures to the Indus Valley civilization we move from the mountains to the plains, from highly localized peasant cultures situated in small villages to an extensive, highly organized culture that was centralized in two large cities. The data relevant to goddess worship are also more extensive and complex when we turn to the culture of the plains.

Hundreds of female figurines have been found in the Indus Valley civilization. The very number of figurines has prompted one scholar to proclaim that there must have been a female figurine in every household.3 The figurines themselves vary quite widely. Most are made quite crudely and are of terra-cotta. Others, notably the famous “dancing girl,” are skillfully crafted and made of bronze.4 A few male figures have been found, but in comparison to the female figurines their numbers are fairly insignificant \(although several of them are striking and among the most dramatic figures found\).5 Some of the figures are virtually indistinguishable according to sex, whereas others appear to be androgynous, having breasts and what appear to be male genitals.6

Generally, the female figurines are not like the so-called Venus figurines that have been found in prehistoric Europe.7 Very few of the Indus Valley statues accentuate the breasts, hips, or genital areas. Although there are some examples of this type,8 most of the Indus Valley figures are on the slim side, often small breasted or sharp breasted. Many of the figures are of almost boyish build.9 A few of the figurines have very narrow waists, sharp breasts, and flared hips reminiscent of the way in which female figures are often portrayed in later Hinduism.10 A striking characteristic of most of the figurines is the well-articulated head. The coiffures of the figurines are usually highly elaborate.11 Head ornaments, or even horns, might be shown instead of or in addition to hair. In most cases one’s attention is drawn to the figure’s head because of these characteristics.12 This stands in sharp contrast to the Venus type of figure, in which the head is usually tiny and nondescript, the viewer’s attention being struck by the breasts, rump, and thighs. A few of the Indus Valley images do seem to assume poses that expose the genitals,13 but this is not typical, and none of these figures is a particularly good example of the splayed-thighs posture that clearly attracts attention to the female womb or genital area.14 Finally, none of the figurines can positively be said to be pregnant.

Another feature of most of the figurines is the crudeness with which they were made. The faces seem to have been stuck together in a hurry \(the features often being represented by lumps of clay stuck onto the face\). In contrast to this is the figures’ elaborate decoration with jewelry. Rarely is a figure shown with much clothing, although many of the figures wear a girdle.15 Finally, a few of the figures seem to have horns.16

There are a few additional female figures on small clay seals, most of whom are more dramatically suggestive than the figurines themselves. One tableau shows what appears to be a nude figure, probably a woman, but it is not entirely clear, with her legs spread and a tree emerging from her womb. The reverse of the seal shows a female figure seated or kneeling with a male figure standing beside her with what looks like a sickle.17 Another seal shows a “goddess” emerging from or standing in a bush or tree with a kneeling figure beside it and an animal facing her.18 A third scene depicts a nude female figure with an animal head \(or mask\) and perhaps animal feet \(hooves\) who leans over a rearing animal, a horned tiger perhaps. Her hand is placed on \(or perhaps stabs\) his shoulder, and a tree stands to the side of the animal-headed female figure.19 A fourth scene shows a clothed figure, whose sex is difficult to determine, standing between two animals with which he or she seems to be holding hands.20

To complete our survey of the data that seem most relevant to possible goddess worship or exaltation of the feminine in the Indus Valley culture, mention should be made of several small circular stone objects or discs with holes in the center. Some commentators have concluded that in conjunction with other objects that have been interpreted as phalluses the circular, pierced discs are meant to represent the vagina and that what we have in the Indus Valley civilization is an example of a religion that emphasized the sacred power of human sexuality. These objects are held to be prototypes of the yoni and liṅga of later Hinduism.21

The majority of scholars who have sought to interpret this data have concluded that goddesses of one sort or another were a central part of the religion of the Indus Valley civilization. The evidence does seem to point to this conclusion. The nature of the goddesses worshiped, however, and the truths these beings have revealed are much more difficult questions. Some scholars have concluded that the Indus Valley culture was dominated by a cult of the Great Mother similar to cults in Asia Minor and the Mediterranean.22 Some scholars have also hypothesized that the religion of the Indus Valley culture represents an early form of Śāktism or an early form of the kind of goddess worship we find in medieval Hinduism.23 Both of these conclusions are tempting. To exegete the relatively mute evidence of the Indus Valley on the basis of materials from other cultures is attractive because the Indus script has not yet been deciphered and therefore we have no textual descriptions or myths concerning the figurines discovered there. To suggest that the Indus Valley figurines are prototypes of later Hindu goddesses is also tempting insofar as it helps explain what appears to be a drastic change in emphasis in the history of the Hindu tradition, a change, that is, from the Vedic tradition, which is dominated by male deities, to a mythology in which goddesses become far more common and dominant. It seems logical to suppose that the emphasis on the feminine in later Hinduism is a survival or persistence of an indigenous, non-Āryan religiosity that has finally “surfaced” in the Hindu tradition.

What are the facts that enable us to resort to either of these solutions in interpreting the Indus Valley data? It is true that there was trade between the Indus Valley and the ancient Near East,24 and it is also true that in both the Indus Valley and the ancient Near East we have roughly contemporary city cultures located on rivers. There is little evidence, however, that the Indus Valley civilization was culturally dependent on ancient Near Eastern cultures or vice versa. Specifically, in the cultures of the ancient Near East which were roughly contemporary with the Indus Valley culture there seem to be no clear examples of figurines or scenes that suggest similarities to the Indus Valley data. The only striking examples, which are extremely few, are found in historically later cultures of the ancient Near East. Quite simply, one is struck by the dissimilarities in appearance between the feminine images of the Indus Valley and the feminine images in the ancient Near East. The evidence of cultural dependence is not overwhelming. This does not mean that the Indus Valley “goddess cults” might not have been very similar to those of the ancient Near East. The differences in appearance between the figurines in the two areas may be merely artistic and stylistic. If one does presume cultural dependence, however, one does so on the basis of no clear evidence to that effect.

Turning to the goddess cults in later Hinduism for possible interpretive direction, we are in a similar dilemma. There are similarities between the Indus Valley data and the Hindu goddess cults, but these similarities, it seems to me, are more superficial than essential or may suggest only superficial continuities rather than essential continuities. It seems typical of both Indus Valley iconography and medieval Hindu iconography to emphasize elaborate adornment when portraying goddesses. In both cases, too, there is a tendency to portray goddesses with elaborate coiffures or lavishly adorned hair. There are also a few examples of images in the Indus Valley which are reminiscent of the slimwaisted, large-breasted images of goddesses in later Hinduism. Beyond these similarities in appearance, which are not overwhelming, there is really nothing else to suggest continuity between the Indus Valley images and later Hindu goddess cults. Marshall’s interpretation of circular stones with holes in the middle as proto-yonis and of other oblong objects as proto-liṅgas is highly speculative. To my knowledge, the two types of objects have not been found conjoined, which would suggest a liṅga set in a yoni, the central image in most Śiva temples. The dramatic scenes depicted on seals mentioned above do not help us much either. None of the scenes reminds us in any striking way of later Hindu myths that feature goddesses, nor do they suggest central themes in later Hindu goddess cults.

Finally, other evidence not bearing directly on goddesses from the Indus Valley does not allow us to presume any essential continuity with later Hinduism. While some scholars have been impressed with the so-called proto-Śiva25 and the highly ordered and probably hierarchical social system of the Indus Valley culture as being similar to aspects of later Hinduism, these similarities are not sufficient to allow us to presume an essential continuity between a highly developed city civilization with a strong centralized authority and later Hinduism, which is clearly village centered, lacks a strong central authority, and has a literary tradition greatly influenced by Āryan religion.26 The evidence for continuity is not so overwhelming that we can read back into the Indus Valley religion elaborate metaphysical truths and complex mythologies that emerge in later Hinduism a thousand years or more after the collapse of the Indus Valley civilization. Clearly, the proper procedure to follow in interpreting the Indus Valley culture is to isolate the evidence and seek to discern meanings on the basis of the evidence itself without reference to contemporary foreign cultures or to a complex religion that postdates the Indus Valley civilization by a millennium.

Data relevant to goddess worship in the Indus Valley civilization show that very few images clearly accentuate feminine physiology. The majority of images stand in sharp contrast to the Venus type of image, in which the breasts, hips, rump, and genital area are exaggerated. In the Indus Valley images the focus of attention is directed not to their bodies but to their heads, which are unusually well formed and accentuated by elaborate coiffures or headdresses. Many of the figurines thus give the impression of being top heavy. Insofar as this is the case, it seems likely that whatever truths these images sought to convey had less to do with feminine physiology than with feminine psychology. Unless we limit our commentary to a few figures \(clearly in the minority\) that approximate the Venus type, we are not justified in speaking of a religion or a vision of reality that exalted the productive, nourishing, creative roles of the feminine. While these aspects are suggested in some images, these emphases cannot be said to be dominant themes on the basis of the data alone, which in general appear to deemphasize those features of feminine physiology that emphasize fertility and nourishment. Among the hundreds of figurines and in the few scenes depicted on seals there are hardly any examples of pregnant women, figures giving birth, figures displaying their genital organs, or figures suckling children.

The most promising data for purposes of interpretation are the female figures portrayed on the seals. Several general ideas seem to be conveyed here. The seal depicting a tree issuing from the womb of a nude woman may emphasize the relation between vegetative life and some \(probably\) divine feminine being.27 It seems, on the basis of this figure, that this ancient culture knew a goddess who was associated with or manifested herself through vegetation, or perhaps was identified with the sap and vigor of plants or perhaps life in general, insofar as the tree issuing from her womb might be a symbol of all life. The reverse of the seal, showing a kneeling or seated female figure with a male figure standing over her holding a sickle, might suggest both an association of this female being with the crops \(the sickle being an agricultural tool\) and a ritual sacrifice of some sort.28 If a sacrifice, or a sacrificial victim, is depicted here, we might hypothesize that a blood offering was made to a goddess to reinvigorate her productive energy, thus ensuring abundant and continued crops. But no sacrifice at all may be implied. The kneeling female figure may simply be receiving a blessing from or showing obeisance to a male deity associated with the harvest. In any case, the combination of these two very suggestive scenes on the same seal \(implying some clear relation\) does lead us to conclude that a female being or goddess was known who gave birth to vegetation and had some association with crops. Insofar as the Indus Valley civilization was economically grounded in agriculture, this is not at all surprising. What is surprising is that there is so little further evidence of such a goddess.

Another seal stresses the association of a female being with vegetation. This seal shows a naked female figure standing in or emerging from a bush.29 That this being is a goddess seems likely because a row of kneeling figures is pictured beneath her, apparently adoring or worshiping her. What is odd about this scene is that an animal faces her, and apparently not a domestic animal but a wild animal. That seal in conjunction with the third seal portraying a dramatic scene featuring a female figure leads us to hypothesize another type of goddess, or female being, who is not so much associated with the fertility of the crops as with wild animals and vegetative life in general. This third seal shows a masked or animal-headed naked female apparently slaying \(or leaning on\) a horned tiger.30 A tree also appears on the right of the seal. While this scene may depict a goddess defeating a demon in combat, what is more clearly suggested is some type of mistress of animals, a being who rules over the various animal species and is responsible both for the well-being of those species and for making them available for the welfare of human beings in the hunt. This type of figure admittedly seems to have very little place in an agriculturally based culture in which the economy must have been only peripherally associated with hunting. Nevertheless, the frequency with which wild animals are shown in the Indus Valley data is remarkable and forces one to use caution before concluding that the religion of the Indus Valley culture revolved around agriculture, the fertility of the crops, and ritual blood sacrifices aimed at ensuring the continued vitality of the crops.

In conclusion, then, what can be said about the meaning and importance of goddess worship in the Indus Valley civilization? First, we can surmise simply on the basis of the great number of female images found that goddesses were known and probably widely worshiped or exalted in this culture. Second, primarily on the basis of three scenes depicted on seals, we can surmise that a goddess was known who was associated with vegetation and most likely with the fertility of the crops. Also on the basis of the three seals and the frequency with which wild animals were shown, we can conclude that a female being was also known who had some connection with animals, perhaps the fertility of animals. If these two types of goddesses were in fact the same goddess, we might further conclude that a goddess was known who presided over all life, plant and animal, and was adored for her life-giving and life-sustaining powers. Whether such a being was also associated with or dependent on a male consort, was the recipient of ritual sacrifice, was mistress of the dead, or was fierce or benign in nature are almost impossible questions to answer.

If the majority of figurines are in fact additional representations of this being, then we might say that she was generally benign in character, for hardly any of the figurines successfully convey frightening aspects. We might say further, if the majority of the figurines are related to the scenes depicted on the seals, that this being was extraordinarily popular, not simply goddess of the elite. It seems likely from the very number of the figurines found that almost every household had such a figure.

There is one drawback to relating the vast number of terra-cotta figures to the female beings shown on the seals, however, and that is that the figures shown on the seals are not dressed like the majority of figurines. The ones on the seals are nude and do not wear elaborate jewelry or have elaborate coiffures. Insofar as the seals must aim at economy of line, however, as they are quite small, these details may simply have been left out. It is also the case, though, that none of the terra-cotta figurines has an animal head or is masked like the figure “slaying” the horned tiger. In conclusion, it is not clear that the terra-cotta figurines were representations of the female figures on the seals, so any conclusions that depend on this association must be tentative.




