---
title: Subversion of v1-s
---

"Why is it so? Where have we, deeply orthodox, ritualistic, endogamous even 30 years ago, faltered so badly."


## Maladaption to modernity under pressure
> "I believe this is part of the larger encounter of the v1s with modernity going bad. As the natural intellectual and to a degree strategic leaders of H society some v1s led the H in their last struggle against the mlechCha-s i.e. 1857CE and lost. In the case of the Kashmirian v1s there was the even earlier trauma of destruction of their world by the u3s.  The once mighty mahArAShTrI v1s of the last H empire drew into a shell shocked by their very visceral defeat to the English just when they had nearly restored H-dom. The triumph of the English & the transition of the Indians to modernity under English tyranny resulted in the v1s having to negotiate the new memetic complex not on their own terms but with constructs of the occident which they had not understood."  - [MT](https://twitter.com/blog_supplement/status/1218980265952976896)
> 
> "In sense it might be seen as sickle cell anemia as an adaptation to malaria: works but has serious problems for the population in long run. There was no time for them to evolve more robust adaptations to modernity on their own terms. This resulted in a disastrous susceptibility to it more dangerous memes and it as consequence a large body of v1s were created especially among those who retained strong traditions of education like v1s in your regions or the south. So this new education without proper indigenization among some v1s made them rAvaNa-s &kumbhakarNa-s - v1s but dharmadviT-s." - [MT](https://twitter.com/blog_supplement/status/1218980265952976896)

> Let the pandit realize that erelong he would cease to exercise any influence upon society, if he do not educate himself properly at this juncture. Now or never is the time to cast off all that is useless in the Tol education and to incorporate with it all that is of real value in the learning of the West... The position of the teacher of Sanskrit in a school or college is precisely emblematic of the Tol Pandit's position in general society. In a school, the good-natured pandit, recruited from the Tol, is regarded by his pupils more as an object of amusement than of reverence. It cannot be otherwise. The student generally possesses a much larger share of real knowledge than his pandit, and he is fully conscious of his superiority. Under these circumstances, how could he really venerate his teacher? What is true in the School is also true in the Society (Chakravarti 1910: 54-5). - Pandit Vanamali Chakravarti Vedantatirtha,who published an edition of Gobhila with the commentary of bhaTTanArAyaNa

> What makes the situation very difficult is the fact that in a traditional teaching in the guru-disciple relationship an objective discussion of facts is not admitted. Studying the authoritative texts does not mean that they be read, discussed, and their meaning discovered with a simple, unprejudiced mind. Instead, the guru teaches his disciples a particular ideology and shows them how this ideology can be “proven” referring to those authoritative texts, which are considered as a divine revelation. In this process, considerable violence is often done to the texts, and it happens that their meaning is turned into the exact opposite. If a student discovers that the teaching of the guru is in contradiction to the Vedas he is expected to believe that this contradiction is only due to his own limited understanding of things. - Dieter Koch

## Active English intellectual subversion
- See [rivals/academia/charges](../../../../rivals/academia/charges/) page for examples of systematic disparagement of Hindu origins of many scientific / mathematical ideas, and their conspicuous absence in education, leading to stunted formation of a confident hindu version of modernity.