+++
title = "01 THE EARLY HISTORY OF ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ"

+++

The goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī does not appear in the earliest Vedic literature.1 The term *śrī*, however, does occur quite often, and it is clear that the meanings of the term are related to the nature of the later goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī. As used in the Vedic hymns the term *śrī* suggests capability, power, and advantageous skills. As an external quality *śrī* suggests beauty, luster, glory, and high rank. The term is especially used in later Vedic literature to refer to the ruling power, dominion, and majesty of kings. As such it seems to be a distinct, disembodied power that is acquired by kings in various ways. It seems to be a power associated more with the office of the king than with the king himself. At one point *śrī* is identified with the cushion upon which the king sits. The idea is that the cushion or seat, *sri,* ruling power, is temporarily possessed by the current owner of the seat.2 *Śrī* also refers to riches, prosperity, and abundance in general. In that sense it is something that may be acquired or possessed by anyone. In short, *śrī* refers to most auspicious qualities and suggests general well-being in terms of physical health, material prosperity, bodily beauty, and ruling majesty.

In what may be the earliest myth that speaks of Śrī as a goddess, she is the personification or embodiment of auspicious, particularly royal, qualities.3 She is born as a result of the austerities of Prajāpati. Seeing Śrī, the other gods covet her qualities and proceed to steal them from her. Ten qualities, or objects, are listed: food, royal power, universal sovereignty, noble rank, power, holy luster, kingdom, fortune, bounteousness, and beauty.4 In Vedic literature, then, the goddess Śrī’s origin seems to be the result of the personification of auspicious qualities, particularly those associated with royal power and riches.

The most detailed picture of Śrī-Lakṣmī in Vedic literature is found in the *Śrī-sūkta,* a hymn in praise of Sri which is part of an appendix to the *Ṛg-veda* and which is probably pre-Buddhist in date.5 This is surely one of the earliest hymns to Śrī and associates her with certain symbols and qualities that persist throughout her history in the Hindu tradition. Not surprisingly, and in conformity with the meanings of the term *śrī* in early Vedic literature, Śrī is invoked to bring fame and prosperity \(verse 7\). She is said to be bountiful and to give abundance \(5\). She is said to bestow on her worshiper gold \(14\), cattle, horses \(1\), and food \(10\). She is asked to banish her sister Alakṣmī, “misfortune” \(5, 6, 8\), who appears in such inauspicious forms as need, poverty, hunger, and thirst \(8\). Royal qualities are suggested when she is described as seated in the middle of a chariot, possessed of the best horses, and delighted by the sounds of elephants \(3\). In outward appearance she is glorious and richly ornamented. She is radiant as gold, illustrious like the moon, and wears a necklace of gold and silver \(1\). She is often said to shine like the sun \(6, 13\) and to be lustrous like fire \(4\).

An important feature of Śrī in this hymn is her association with fertility, a feature that was not significantly emphasized in earlier usages of the term *śrī* in Vedic literature. In the *Śrī-sūkta* she is described as moist \(13, 14\), perceptible through odor \(9\), abundant in harvest, and dwelling in cow dung \(9\). Her son is said to be Kardama, which means mud, mire, or slime \(11\). Clearly, Śrī is associated with growth and the fecundity of moist, rich soil. Her presence is affirmed to be discernible in the mysterious potency of the earth. Although Śrī’s association with agricultural fertility does not play a central role in her later literary history in Hinduism, this aspect of Śrī remains important to this day at the village level. Villagers, particularly women, are reported to worship Śrī in the form of cow dung on certain occasions, and this form of worship is actually enjoined in the *Nilamata-purāṇa*.6

The hymn to Śrī also mentions two objects that come to be consistently associated with Srī throughout her history: the lotus and the elephant. She is seated on a lotus, is the color of a lotus \(4\), appears like a lotus \(5\), is covered with lotuses, and wears a garland of lotuses \(14\). Throughout her history, in fact, Śrī-Lakṣmī is often called Padmā and Kamala, “lotus.” The popularity of the lotus in Indian art and iconography, both Buddhist and Hindu, suggests a complex and multivalent meaning associated with the lotus.

As expressive of Śrī-Lakṣmī’s nature two general meanings seem apparent. First, the lotus is a symbol of fertility and life which is rooted in and takes its strength from the primordial waters.7 The lotus symbolizes vegetative growth that has distilled the life-giving power of the waters into embodied life.8 The lotus, and the goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī by association, represents the fully developed blossoming of organic life. At the macrocosmic level the lotus might be taken as a symbol of the entire created world. The lotus growing from the navel of Viṣṇu marks the beginning of a new cosmic creation. The frequent use of the lotus in Tantric *maṇḍalas* also points to the lotus as a symbol of the entire created universe.9 The lotus suggests a growing, expanding world imbued with vigorous fertile power. It is this power that is revealed in Śrī-Lakṣmī. She is the nectar \(the *rasa\)* of creation which lends to creation its distinctive flavor and beauty. Organic life, impelled as it is by this mysterious power, flowers richly and beautifully in the creative processes of the world.

The second meaning of the lotus in relation to Śrī-Lakṣmī refers to purity and spiritual power. Rooted in the mud but blossoming above the water, completely uncontaminated by the mud, the lotus represents spiritual perfection and authority. A common motif in Hindu and Buddhist iconography is the lotus seat. The gods and goddesses, the buddhas and bodhisattvas, typically sit or stand upon a lotus, which suggests their spiritual authority. To be seated upon or to be otherwise associated with the lotus suggests that the being in question—god, buddha, or human being—has transcended the limitations of the finite world \(the mud of existence, as it were\) and floats freely in a sphere of purity and spirituality. Śrī-Lakṣmī thus suggests more than the fertilizing powers of moist soil and the mysterious powers of growth. She suggests a perfection or state of refinement that transcends the material world. She is associated not only with royal authority but with spiritual authority as well and she combines royal and priestly powers in her presence.

One of the most popular and enduring representations of Śrī-Lakṣmī shows her flanked by two elephants in the so-called Gaja-Lakṣmī images. The elephants shower her with water from their trunks or empty pots of water over her.10 The elephants seem to have two related meanings. First, they most likely represent fertilizing rains. An ancient Hindu tradition says that the first elephants had wings and flew about the sky. In fact, they were clouds and showered the earth with rain wherever they went. These sky elephants, however, were cursed by a sage when they landed on a tree under which he was meditating and broke his concentration. Stripped of their wings, they henceforth had to remain earth-bound. But these earth elephants are still regarded as cousins of clouds, and their presence is supposed to attract their “white cousins,” who bring fertilizing rains with them.11 The flanking, showering elephants in images of Śrī-Lakṣmī reinforce one of the principal themes that we have already noted in her nature, her association with the fertility of crops and the sap of existence. Where Lakṣmī is, there elephants are, and where elephants are, there is produced the fertilizing potency of rain.

Second, elephants suggest royal authority. Kings in ancient India kept stables of elephants, which formed their heavy artillery in military campaigns. Kings often traveled on elephants in ceremonial processions, and in general elephants were considered an important indication of royal authority. Kings in ancient India were also believed to be responsible for rain and the fertility of the crops.12 To ensure the kings’ beneficial influence, it was probably important for them to keep several elephants for their power to bring fertilizing rains. In the king and the elephant, then, are brought together two central themes in the imagery of Śrī-Lakṣmī, royal authority and fertility.

Images of Śrī with elephants are probably meant to portray the act of royal consecration. The central ritual action of the Vedic royal-consecration ceremony, the Rājasūya, was the *abhiṣekha* ritual, in which the king was consecrated by having auspicious waters poured over him to bestow authority and vigor on him.13 Insofar as the elephants in these images of Lakṣmī may be understood to be portraying the *abhiṣekha,* they bestow the qualities of fertility and royal authority on Lakṣmi, herself the source of these very qualities.14 The elephants, furthermore, are often shown standing on lotuses,15 the preeminent symbol of Lakṣmī. The elephants thus imbue Lakṣmī with those very qualities that she possesses to the highest degree, and she in turn infuses the elephants with the same qualities. A more highly charged image denoting the increase of royal authority, fertility, and vigor would be difficult to imagine.16
