+++
title = "03 ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ IN THE PĀÑCARĀTRA AND ŚRĪ VAIṢṆAVA SCHOOLS"

+++

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu eventually leads to her playing important roles in the mythological and philosophic visions of the Pāñcarātra and Śrī Vaiṣṇava schools of thought and devotion. In the Pāñcarātra school Lakṣmī comes to play the central role in the creation and evolution of the universe as the *śakti* of Viṣṇu. In the Pāñcarātra creation scenario Viṣṇu remains almost entirely inactive, relegating the creative process to Lakṣmī. After awakening Lakṣmī at the end of the night of dissolution, Viṣṇu’s role in the creation of the universe is restricted to that of an inactive architect whose plan is put into effect by a builder. Lakṣmī alone acts, and the impression throughout the cosmogony is that she acts independently of Viṣṇu, although it is stated that she acts according to his wishes.49

The practical effect of Viṣṇu’s inactive role in creation is that he becomes so aloof that Lakṣmī dominates the entire Pāñcarātra vision of the divine. In effect she acquires the position of the supreme divine principle, the underlying reality upon which all rests, that which pervades all creation with vitality, will, and consciousness. The *Lakṣmī-tantra,* a popular Pāñcarātra text, says that Lakṣmī undertakes the entire stupendous creation of the universe with only a one-billionth fraction of herself \(14.3\). So transcendent is she, so beyond the ability of the mind to circumscribe her, that only a miniscule fraction of her is manifest in the creation of the universe. Elsewhere in the same text she describes herself as follows:



Inherent in the \(principle of\) existence, whether manifested or unmanifested, I am at all times the inciter \(potential element of all things\). I manifest myself \(as the creation\), I ultimately dissolve myself \(at the time of destruction\) and I occupy myself with activity \(when creation starts functioning\).

I alone send \(the creation\) forth and \(again\) destroy it. I absolve the sins of the good. As the \(mother\) earth towards all beings, I pardon them \(all their sins\). I mete everything out. I am the thinking process and I am contained in everything. \(50.65.67\)50

Functionally Lakṣmī has taken over the cosmic functions of the three great male gods of the Hindu pantheon: Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. In the Pāñcarātra vision, by creating, sustaining, and periodically destroying the universe, she completely dominates the divine, mythological landscape. She also occupies the central position as the object of devotion, the dispenser of grace, and the final bestower of liberation \(50.131–132\). Throughout the *Lakṣmī-tantra* it is she, not Viṣṇu, who is described as the object of devotion, the one who grants all desires and whose special mantra embodies salvific power. It is she, not Viṣṇu, whose form is described in detail and presented as the supreme object of meditation.51

Although Lakṣmī has been elevated functionally to a position of supreme divinity in the Pāñcarātra school and has been identified with various philosophic absolutes, she retains her nature as the goddess who both imbues creatures with illustriousness and well-being and pervades the creation as the sap of existence. At one point in the *Lakṣmī-tantra,* for example, she says of herself: “Like the fat that keeps a lamp burning I lubricate the senses of living beings with my own sap of consciousness” \(50.110\). Elsewhere she is said to be *prakṛti* \(50.64, 96\), the principle of nature in Hinduism which spontaneously creates all material reality. *Prakṛti* is the creation’s dynamic aspect, which tends toward multiplication, diversification, and specificity.52 It is an active, fertile principle that is similar to the sap of existence with which Lakṣmī is identified during her early history. Laksml’s identification throughout the Pancaratra system with Viṣṇu’s *śakti* is also a way of declaring her association with fertile power. Although the idea of *śakti* is somewhat more refined and inorganic than *rasa, soma, amrta,* or the powers of fertility, *sakti* does suggest unambiguously the idea of vigorous, dynamic power associated with life and growth. Despite her promotion, therefore, it is clear that Lakṣmī retains her essential character as a dynamic, positive force that underlies growth, fertility, and prosperity.

A central presupposition in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism is that Viṣṇu, the supreme deity for this school, is always accompanied by, attended by, or otherwise associated with his consort Śrī. But Śrī does not play the central cosmological role as she does in the Pāñcarātra school. In Śrī Vaiṣṇavism Viṣṇu is clearly the central actor on the mythological stage and is equated with the highest philosophic principles. Śrī-Lakṣmī has nevertheless acquired an important role among certain Śrī Vaiṣṇava theologicians as the mediator between Viṣṇu and his devotees.53

The central aim of the Śrī Vaiṣṇava devotee is to cultivate and perfect his inherent duty, which is to love his Lord, and in so loving his Lord to identify himself with God as closely as possible. The writings of some philosophers of the school say that in approaching the Lord and requesting purity and grace Lakṣmī acts as a mediating presence between the devotee and Viṣṇu. For Vedānta Desika \(A.D. 1268–1368\) Lakṣmī seems indispensable in approaching Viṣṇu. She is described in his writings as a gracious mother who willingly intervenes with her often-stern husband on the devotee’s behalf. “O Mother who resides on the lotus, hearken to my plea\! I babble like a child; with your grace \(*prasāda*\) make the Lord who is your beloved listen to my \[petition\].”54 Elsewhere he writes: “The mother . . . , whose nature is such that her grace is unmixed with any anger and is showered on all, does not spare any effort to make the punishing Lord be pleased with those who have committed several faults. She cools the heat of His anger, which arises because He is the father.”55

Other Śrī Vaiṣṇava theologians share this view of Śrī as an intermediary between the sinful devotee and Viṣṇu. Periyāvaccān Pillai \(b. 1228\) describes a conversation between Śrī and Viṣṇu in which Śrī acts as a devotee’s advocate. Viṣṇu speaks first: “‘Since beginningless time this human has been disobeying my laws and has been the object of my anger. If I condone his faults and accept them patiently, instead of punishing him, I will be disregarding the injunctions of *śastra.*’ Śrī replies: ‘But if you punish the human, instead of saving him, your quality of grace will not survive.’”56 In this passage Śrī takes the side of the devotee by arguing that if Viṣṇu does not save the sinner his reputation as merciful will be threatened. Her argument plays on Viṣṇu’s own conception of himself. Elsewhere Śrī is said to resort to distracting Viṣṇu from his intention to punish a devotee by enticing him with her beauty. Maṇavāḷa Māmunikal \(1370–1443\) says of Śrī: “She uses her beauty to entice and enslave \[the Lord\]. She makes eyes at Him, she lets her dress slip down a little.”57

In Śrī Vaiṣṇavism Śrī embodies divine compassion. While Viṣṇu, as the mighty king of heavenly Vaikuṇṭha, may seem so awesome and transcendent as to be all but unapproachable to the lowly devotee, Śrī provides an aspect of the divine that is eminently approachable. In this role as mediator she considerably softens the Śrī Vaiṣṇava vision of the divine and allows feelings of intimacy and warmth to pervade the devotee’s devotional moods toward the divine.

It should be noted that in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism the goddess is still renowned for bestowing all good things. Indeed, she is sovereignty.58 It is fitting that as the mediator between Viṣṇu and the devotee she bestows on the devotee the most cherished of all boons, her husband’s grace.
