+++
title = "04 THE WORSHIP OF ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ"

+++

Śrī-Lakṣmī is today one of the most popular and widely venerated deities of the Hindu pantheon. Her auspicious nature and her reputation for granting fertility, luck, wealth, and well-being seem to attract devotees in every Indian village. “All of India’s back country is the dominion of Lakṣmī, the goddess of the lotus. . . . She accompanies every mile traveled through central India, every visit to a temple. . . . Her likenesses are omnipresent on the walls and pillars, lintels and niches of sanctuaries, regardless of the deity of their specific dedication.”59

Lakṣmī is worshiped throughout the year in a variety of festivals,60and she is the constant object of *vratas,* “religious vows,” by means of which devotees ask her for a blessing in return for undertaking some act of devotion or piety on her behalf. The blessings requested vary according to the devotee and according to whether the *vrata* is undertaken during a festival in which certain kinds of blessings are traditional. The most common boons, however, have to do with marital fidelity or the longevity of one’s spouse, the fertility of the crops, and the bestowal of material well-being.

The most important festival in which Lakṣmī is worshiped today \(except in Bengal\) is Dīpavalī \(Dīvalī\), which is held in the late autumn. Three important and interrelated themes are seen in this festival: Lakṣmī’s association with wealth and prosperity, her association with fertility and abundant crops, and her association with good fortune in the coming year. Perhaps the most obvious indication that Lakṣmī is identified with prosperity is her popularity among merchants. During this festival it is customary for people, especially businessmen, to worship their account books.61 It seems to be clearly understood by merchants that wealth will not arise without Lakṣmī’s blessing or presence.

Agricultural motifs are also fairly clear in this festival as it is celebrated in some places. Cultivators are enjoined to worship their crops \(which at this time of year have been harvested\) and offer sacrifices of goats and sheep. “Moreover they visit the dunghill which is collected for manuring the field for future crops and fall prostrate and beg to fertilize their lands and to procure abundant crops. In the Decan and in Orissa the heap of cowdung is also worshiped by every householder on this day.”62

Lakṣmī is also associated with crops and food in Orissa on the occasion of the Kaumudī-pūrṇima festival. On these days women invoke Lakṣmī on a mound of new grain and recall a story in which Lakṣmī’s disappearance results in the disappearance of crops and food and her return prompts the return of abundance.63 The worship of Lakṣmī during Durgā Pūjā is also significant in terms of her association with agriculture. Although Durgā Pūjā as it is celebrated today in India is not primarily a harvest festival, there are many indications that the renewed vigor of the crops is still an aspect of the festival.64

The association of Lakṣmī with good fortune in the coming year is also a significant aspect of the Dīpavalī festival. During this festival end-of-the-year motifs are clear. At this time ghosts of the dead are said to return,65 Bali, a demon, is said to emerge from the underworld to rule for three days, goblins and malicious spirits are about,66 and gambling, profligate spending, and boisterous activity are commanded. Throughout the festival Lakṣmī is invoked to ward off the dangerous effects of the returned dead and the emergent demon king and his hosts and to bless the gambler with success that will betoken his good luck during the entire coming year. The banishment of Alakṣmī, the female spirit associated with bad luck and misfortune, is also associated with this festival. It is believed in many places that Alakṣmī is driven away for the coming year by lighting lamps, which is one of the most beautiful and characteristic features of this festival, and by making noise with pots and pans or instruments.67 On another occasion in Bengal an image of Alakṣmī is made and ceremoniously disfigured by cutting off its nose and ears, after which an image of Lakṣmī is installed to signify the presence of good luck in the future.68

During Dīpīvalī people also replace the small clay images of Lakṣmī and Gaṇeśa which are revered in many homes and shops in North India. Lakṣmī’s association with Gaṇeśa, the elephant-headed son of Śiva and Pārvatī, is prominent in North India. Indeed, it is more common to see Lakṣmī beside Gaṇeśa than beside Viṣṇu in most parts of North India today. This association represents the continuity of some important themes in Lakṣmī’s character. Lakṣmī is often associated with elephants, the Gaja-Lakṣmī motif being ancient and consistent throughout her history. Her current association with Ganeśa probably suggests meanings similar to those inherent in the Gaja-Lakṣmī scenes. In addition, Gaṇeśa is a Yakṣa-type figure, associated with riches and good luck. It is appropriate that, like Kubera, he should be revered along with Lakṣmī, herself the embodiment of wealth and luck.

Another aspect of Lakṣmī is the focus of a summer festival in honor of her and Viṣṇu. This festival signals the point at which Viṣṇu is believed to fall asleep for several months. It is common to pray to Viṣṇu at this time to prevent the loss of one’s wife or husband. In this festival Lakṣmī and Viṣṇu are the embodiment of marital harmony and bliss. Lakṣmī is understood to be the faithful, loving, and obedient wife.69 At another festival in honor of her and Viṣṇu, Lakṣmī plays the role of a jealous wife and protector of the home. Viṣṇu is said to go off with another consort during this festival, and Lakṣmī, in anger over his unfaithfulness, breaks his vehicle and temporarily locks him out of their home \(the temple\).70



