+++
title = "01 Variation and Vocabulary"

+++
Having worked our way through this whirlwind tour—this grand if sometimes bewildering tapestry of Indic literature and ethnography, emotions big and small, ritual formations, health and disease, initiatory trauma and transformation, and much more—we now offer reactions and a few conclusions. First, however, summary descriptions of various kinds of possession are in order. Possession may be destructive (Kali possessing Nala and childsnatchers invading the bodies of pregnant women), instructional (the possession by gandharvas of the daughter and wife of Patañcala Kāpya in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (BĀU) in what must have been a semipublic séance, and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king in order to obtain knowledge of erotics and defeat Ubhayabhāratī, the wife of Maṇḍana Misra, in debate), healing or unifying (possession by Soma, transfer of essences described in the Upaniṣads, tantric śaktipāta initiation), protective (Vipula Bhārgava possessing Ruci), symptomatic of perfected devotion (the līlāveśa or bhagavadāvesa of Vallabhācārya and Rūpa Gosvāmī), a tool used by advanced yogins to influence others (Yogasūtras, Brahmasūtras), or indicative of a state of immersion in erotic love, in the cycle of rebirth, in the Lord’s love games, or even in the Lord’s very body (again bhagavadāveśa, saṃsārāveśa, līlāveśa). When humans possess others, as in the case of Vipula Bhārgava or Śaṅkara, the purpose is viewed as benign. It is regarded similarly when the possessing agent is a substance, an abstraction, or an essence (soma, medhas, etc.). When negative spirits (bhuta, piśāca, etc.) are the agents of possession, it is considered destructive. But when the agent is a semidivine being with a preponderance of good qualities, such as a gandharva, ambiguous results are weighted toward the positive.

I have identified three distinctions within the lexicography of possession, all with wide margins and hazy boundaries: those represented by āvesa, praveśa, and grahana. In spite of these margins and boundaries, however, āveśa exhibits much less polysemy than the other terms, indicating that its semantic field rarely slips beyond the boundaries proposed here. Āveśa suggests self-induced pervasion of a distinct and attractive force within the personality, even if what is attractive is negative, such as anger. More appositely, it is self-induced possession of a celestial or ethereal being, from a goddess who confers oracular experience (this is often found in the ethnographic record) to an experience of thorough destructiveness, such as the possession of Asvatthāman by Śiva (Mahābhārata [MBh] 10.7.64–65). In all cases, āveśa indicates a significant shift in personality. This is usually a learned and controlled dissociative behavior that is consuming, integrative, and seamless, with little trace of inner conflict, at least in the short run. In these two varieties of āveśa, the experiences of emotional absorption and that of spirit or deity possession are nearly indistinguishable. An example of this occurs in the MBh when “a bitter rage took possession” (tīvraroṣasamāviṣṭā; 3.60.34)1 of Damayantī after a hunter who rescued her from the jaws of a boa constrictor, then tried to rape her. It is important to understand that this manner of speaking, which is familiar in the English language, is taken more literally in South Asia. In the West, emotion is devalued much more than it is in South Asia, as we saw in Chapter 8, and this example is one among countless numbers that reveal the nexus of emotion and possession (see Chapter 6, for evidence from the MBh). Āveśa is driven to another level when it becomes samāveśa, a term used profusely in Tantric texts to indicate a state of complete absorption in an object or deity.2

The use of the word praveśa reflects possession’s hazy boundaries. Generally it bears the sense of externally motivated possession, as in parakāya- or paraśarīra-praveśa, possessing another’s (para-) body (kāya, śarīra), though more infrequently āveśa is used in this sense. Praveśa, when it is distinguished from āvesa, indicates suppression of the individual personality without disturbing its constructed identity. An entity or thought form is introduced by an external agent in order to bring about a specific result in the body, or less often the mind, of the one possessed. A result may occur without the knowledge of the possessed individual, thus not interfering with his or her conscious intention or volition. Externally induced possession in this sense differs significantly from the kind of brahmanical possession that is embodied through nyāsa and (prāṇa-)pratiṣṭhā (Chapter 10). The main difference between them in this context is that nyāsa is self-induced whereas (prāṇa-)pratiṣṭhā is externally induced. Nevertheless, the piecemeal or gradual manner in which the pervasion and transformation occurs in these rituals is ambiguous with respect to āveśa and praveśa, not fitting easily into either category. Yet, like both of them, these serial invocations fundamentally alter the identity and character of the ritualist or iconic form.

Another instance of the absence of standardization in the vocabulary of possession is seen in the use of the word parigraha in Yogācāra Buddhism, in the phrase ātmabhāva-parigraha (taking possession of a [new] personal existence) (Chapter 7). This is similar in meaning to Vallabhācārya’s saṃsārāveśa (Chapter 9), immersion in the cycle of rebirth. Possession expressed as grahaṇa and etymologically related terms more often than not indicate conflict with the possessing agent without suppression of the intent or personality of the possessed. The desires and attributes of one afflicted by spirits called grahas remain intact, though the presence of the graha introduces into the personality an element of conflict, instability, or destructiveness. The section on childsnatchers (bālagrahas) in the MBh (Chapter 6) and the chapter on demonologies (bhūtavidyā) in Āyurveda, Tantra, and various ethnographic reports (Chapter 12) bear this out.
