+++
title = "02 Possession and Embodiment"

+++
Among the prominent images in the Upaniṣads is that of the body as a locus for external forces. Although the early Upaniṣads are best known for their discussions of interior topography, they also display a sure knowledge of and deep concern for the physical body. Their knowledge of organs and other aspects of human physiology is derived largely from the antecedent Brāhmaṇa literature, in most cases indicating that this knowledge served purposes other than health. Principally, the purpose was to describe animals fit for sacrifice. This vision is modified in the Yoga, Śaiva, and other, later subgenres of Upaniṣads, when interest in the vedic sacrifices had begun to wane, to one in which the body is seen to encase nāḍīs (channels that circulate within the body) and cakras (subtle energy centers that are lined up vertically from the perineum to the crown of the head). Thus, the tantric vision of the body led to modifications in the Upaniṣadic view (e.g., Dhyānabindu Upaniṣad 50–72, Yogacūḍāmaṇi Upaniṣad).3 Increasingly, through various practices of yoga (āsana and prāṇāyāma), the body was viewed as transmutable. Although this is most evident in the later Upaniṣads, the early ones foreshadow them in this regard. In the waking state, the “self” (ātman) is said to abide in the heart, but in deep sleep and dream it wanders in the nāḍīs (BĀU 2.1.17). Sometimes it exits the body entirely, leaving the prāṇas in charge. At death, according to the later Upaniṣads, it leaves the body via the suṣumnā nāḍī (central upwardly flowing channel) (Yogaśikha Upaniṣad 6.5, etc.). The chief function of the body, then, is to house the life force (jīva) and, according to some Upaniṣads, the ātman. Brahmā, the Taittirīya (2.1.1) and Muṇḍaka (3.1.7) Upaniṣads state, dwells in the guhā, the space in the heart. Similarly, according to the Kaṭha (2.20) and Śvetāśvatara (3.11) Upaniṣads, the deity dwells in the guhā of all creatures. The Muṇḍaka (2.1.8,10) and Svetāsvatara (3.20) add that puruṣa is placed in it, while the Maitrāyaṇi Upaniṣad (26) states that ātman enters into it. The Kaṭha (4.6) says that the firstborn of Brahmā and Āditya enter and abide there, while many later Upaniṣads list a number of possible deities who assume residence in this secret place. The late Subala Upaniṣad (7.8), for example, states that Nārāyaṇa dwells there, while the Kaivalya Upaniṣad (3) states that the mendicant (yati) enters (visānti) what shines in the secret place.4 As explicated in Chapter 5, the Indic body was ripe for possession.

It should be clear by now that the possession experience as revealed in Sanskrit texts and modern ethnographies is at once embodied and disembodied. Allowing liberal room for variation, the descriptive and linguistic material presented here reveals a consistency, a more or less consensual affirmation that the subjectivity of emotion, both as experienced and evaluated states, merges in possession states with the (presumed) objectivity of spirits, deities, or entities and notions with an even greater degree of abstraction.5 What the evidence here reveals, moreover, is that the embodied self in possession states “on the ground” in Sanskrit texts only vaguely resembles the normative self of Indian analytical thought as presented in Sāṃkhya, Vedānta, Buddhism, and Āyurveda.6 More generally, the ubiquitousness of possession states in South Asia calls into question the very notion of personal identity. The Upaniṣads, says Wimal Dissanayake, “reflect a certain unwillingness to take adequately into consideration the world of sense perception.”7 Although the Weltanschauung officially registered by brahmanical and other South Asian orthodoxies idealizes an asceticism that in its public presentation takes a dim view of corporality, Frits Staal points out that, on the contrary, embodiment is highly valued, at least to practitioners of yoga, where “physical exercises are not ascetic mortifications [but] are conceived of as ‘perfections’ (siddhi).” Indeed, what is sought after through development of the body “is ‘altered states,’ but not ‘of consciousness’ (as in contemporary Western adaptations), but of the body.”8 This can also be said of possession, which is necessarily an altered bodily state, regardless of whether the possession is deemed positive or negative.

What possession states reveal is an embodiment dominated by intentionality, emotion, desire, aversion, physical need, subtle essences, a tendency to action, and cyclical or ritual modes of functioning. This paradigm is very different from the description in Bhagavad Gītā 13.1–6, in which the self as body is said to be composed of the five mahābhutas or great elements (earth, water, fire, air, space), ego, reason, the unmanifest (avyakta), the ten senses and the mind, the five sensory fields, desire, aversion, happiness and suffering, the embodied whole, intelligence, and steadfastness. The former reveals a body constructed of abstractions closer to the early and middle vedic model than to the model presented in Sāṃkhya and most of the Upaniṣads.9

What, then, is the body possessed? As Staal understands it, the meaning of the body is its very presence, the fact of its being and its movement.10 Its meaning does not reside in secondary analysis, in verbalizing, in communicating. The body possessed is not symbolic of something else, nor is it, in itself, a message to be communicated to a culturally conditioned public, a reinforcement of a set of beliefs. If Staal is to be believed, and his argument appears cogent, the important anthropological theory that communication is the very essence of being, action, and ritual, is nullified. Following Humphrey and Laidlaw, it is not necessary that we project our own drive (especially an academic drive) for derivative meaning onto others.

Personality was never far removed from visions of the body. In classical India personality was described in different terms from those familiar to the modern world, with very different abstractions and psychological influences. Whereas modern societies express personality as the sum of one’s experiences, thoughts, emotions, inhibitions, moments of freedom, and so on, in India of old the complexity was expressed differently. One of the vehicles for understanding personality in classical India was the grid of physicality presented in the Sāṃkhya philosophy, with the senses and sense organs evolving in a linear fashion from primordial materiality (prakṛti), an abstraction absent in Western thought. In this way, the structure of the body and its perceptual equipment reached deeply and directly into the nature of reality itself. Thus, fundamental changes in the surface levels of individuality resonated deeply into the shared level of primordiality, creating a channel by which penetration of external forces could be felt through the entire system. Although possession is nowhere described in this manner, it seems to be a viscerally felt mechanism running throughout most formal Indian epistemological systems. After Sāṃkhya became incorporated into the Mahābhārata and the foundational āyurvedic texts in the early centuries of the Common Era, personality was most often constructed along its gridlines. However, the Sāṃkhya explanatory system did not obliterate other systems completely; it was in fact coeval with the remnants of an earlier more vedic system, in which personality included cosmological trace elements that entered the individual from outside. Thus, whether it was constructed according to Sāṃkhya or its antecedent systems, the individual was not conceived of as autonomous, as is the dominant position in the West.11 The individual was, instead, conceived of as porous, allowing trace material from Brahmā, the Ādityas, and other beings from devas to rākṣasas to enter. As shown in Chapter 12, categories of invasive bhūtas or grahas corresponded to categories of sattvas that served as the foundations of personality. The brief summary of the mechanics of entrance from the Upaniṣads given above, then, may be regarded as paradigmatic of the way personality was formed, regardless of whether it took root along the gridlines of Sāṃkhya.

Possession, regardless of the term used for it, was often understood in Sanskrit (and other Indic) texts as a modification of personality, rather than as a psychological aberration for which the individual must necessarily be held accountable. “Positive” possession was esteemed, if somewhat feared, and those subject to it were most often productive members of their communities. By contrast, “negative” possession befell individuals regarded as unstable; indeed, their possession was the mark of their instability. In most cases, however, negative possession was usually regarded as treatable, and the practice of mental health care in India beginning in the ancient period has regarded the possessed individual as a victim, rather than a perpetrator. Even if the treatments were sometimes heavy-handed, as the āyurvedic texts indicate was possible, they were invariably designed to exorcise the bhūta or graha as well as rebalance the individual’s humors or doṣas. Whether positive or negative, possession was viewed as a fortuitous, though by no means unnatural, experience of intensity that was often so subtle that it went unnoticed by others in everyday life. Possession may or may not be recognized by the conscious mind of either the possessed or the observer, occurring as it does as a result of an inherent capacity or vulnerability, or, viewing it from the perspective of the widely assimilated Sāṃkhya cosmogony, the effect of an openness structured by the fluid progression from sense organs (indrīya) to primordial materiality (prakṛti). Within that space, any idea or internal form can materialize and mutate. As such, it may also fall anywhere within the extreme limits of subjectification and objectification, which are often the same thing. As such, it has not and cannot have been completely censored by the agents of brahmanical prudery; it is available in the interstices and thus has been addressed less graphically by the classical philosophers, poets, and mystics, to whom organization, boundaries, and control have been paramount, than by poets, indigenous medical authors, and ethnographers, to whom physical symptoms and gestures were often more accessible.12

Regardless of the brahmanical source, possession has been dealt with as a kind of intrusion and intensity, an undermining, shifting, or transforming of the identity of the possessed. And regardless of the form that the possession takes, it demonstrates the fragility of personal identity, its instability, elusiveness, and permeability. The latter is illustrated in the juxtaposition of the gross (sthūla-), the subtle (sūkṣma- or liṇga-), and the causal (kāraṇa-) bodies (śarīra), in classical Indian religio-philosophical thought, each with progressively diminishing corporality, which nevertheless command the capacity to pass to one another data in the form of trace material of past experience.13 Another ready illustration of the threat to the notion of the autonomous person is the Indian ideal of enlightenment, in which the limitations and defects of personal identity are transcended. The transactions and transformations involved in this are rooted in bandhu or bandhutā, an epistemological strategy dating to the middle vedic period, discussed in Chapter 5, in which entities or ideas are identified with each other, all of which are believed to possess degrees of affective physicality.14 These range from “The dawn is the head of the horse,” the classic beginning of the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad, to “I am brahman” (ahaṃ brahmāsmi; BĀU 1.4.10), one of the classic utterances of enlightenment (mahāvākya).15 These contribute to the conclusion that personal identity as construed in brahmanical India is characterized by permeable boundaries.

Āveśa, praveśa, and related terms represent extensions into later India of this “vedic” way of seeing the universe, the self, and the body. The individual, in this case, would not be fractured by possession, but recognized as intrinsically vulnerable, permeable, and connected with other objects, many of them unexpected. The components of the individual, including the mind, body, and physical and conceptual environments, are equally permeable; possession in all its different varieties expresses the collapse of their boundaries, or even of their substantial differences.16 The distinction between mind and body, humanity and nature, essence, idea, quality, and deity, would be (largely) one of degree rather than of kind, as, indeed, one tends to understand from Indian texts. The sharp limitation imposed by Vedānta, that the self (ātman) is identical in essence with the absolute (brahman) but not with anything relational, is not borne out in other literary contexts, where “floating forms” are equally constitutive of the self and of personal identity.17 This view is supported by Marriott’s and Inden’s ethnosociology and the view of the person construed therein,18 in which, states Arjun Appadurai, “South Asians do not separate the moral from the natural order, act from actor, person from collectivity, and everyday life from the realm of the transcendent.”19

In this way possession is simultaneously utopian and dystopian; this dialogic quality is the sine qua non of its body politic. The embodied self, porous and available for possession, becomes contested geography, a condition of uncertainty that invites openness and frustration. The latter occurs because openness embeds a liberating multivocality, but one that is challenged, first, by the expectation of identity and the habitus implied therein and, second, by one’s locus within the social system. Personal habits and peculiarities are what distinguish an individual within a culture, even one with a rigid social structure. One’s locus in the social system is defined by occupation, family, and, in India, caste. All of these recede into liminality when the agent is possessed. This liminality, in which human and divine or two humans are centrally attributed, tugs at one’s identity so strongly that the fabric of the individual becomes reshaped and risks being permanently scarred. Identity is transferred from moment to moment, guided by a circumscribed set of conditions and conditionings. This constantly mutating identity threatens to implode into creative openness while simultaneously exploding into social and political catastrophe. Possession, no matter how it manifests, is traumatic in the same way that disease or enlightenment can be. Disease, such as consumptive cancer, or physical injury, such as the loss of a limb or amnesia resulting from brain damage, disrupts our sense of self, as does death in the family, loss of our home, failure in our job, and so on. So, it is said, does an experience of enlightenment, as we can no longer function as we did previously. When our sense of who we are shifts unexpectedly and suddenly, our identity is disrupted and we lose our center. Partial or complete personality or identity displacement, which could be a product of an extreme and often practiced dissociation (usually acknowledged to be enticing and attractive) is a generally recognized aspect of the experience of possession. It is an experience of alterity, a fundamental, even unrecognizable strangeness, within the individual. It is the outsider within the complex individual, with his or her narrative of identity, who evaluates and comes to terms with the multivocality within.

Possession, then, whether positive or negative, is a state of tension, of lived irony, in which dilemmas are resolved (for better or worse) because the volition of the dominant, socially hegemonic voice is reduced to the point of disappearance as another authority is expressed through the body. In possession, the self-interest inherent in individual agency is overcome, replaced with a force that is, improbably, more believable and trustworthy than that usually expressed by the individual. Thus, possession expresses what Durkheim regarded as the heterogeneity of the sacred and the profane: the divine authority of the body and the bodily authority of the divine.

Can we characterize a dominant structure of personal identity in India, at least before the modern period of Westernization?20 Have there always been battle lines between individual autonomy and multivocality in which, in the end, the dominance of the former must be threatened, disrupted, or even terminated? This, arguably, is what Kṛṣṇa did to Arjuna on the battlefield at Kurukṣetra. He presented to Arjuna an alternative to his narrative of himself. Arjuna had locked in a notion of himself through a selective narrative that refused to recognize his multivocality. In the end, though Arjuna capitulated, he shied away from the vision of finality, the viśvarūpa-darśana, that Kṛṣṇa presented to him in the eleventh chapter of the Gitā.

More germane is a 1995 editorial in The Times of India by Dipankar Gupta, which states, “A close reading of our Constitution and of the Constituent Assembly debates will show that there was a marked hesitation among our national representatives to articulate the notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual.”21 Although the editorial was concerned with the supposedly fundamental human right to success in the face of the Indian system of job quotas and educational reservations based on caste, the startling fact is that the ill-defined notion of the “self-subsistent and unencumbered individual” in ancient and classical India changed little throughout Indian history. The individual was rarely considered the definitive human unit, at least in Hindu India, generally relinquishing that role to the family or caste (jāti rather than varṇa). Because the social boundaries of the individual were intrinsically permeable, the notion of possession, of not subsisting or acting alone, was easily realized. Indeed, bodily boundaries were penetrated or dissolved by the simple ritual of nyāsa, by an advanced yogin or yoginī projecting his or her consciousness or thoughts, by demons of disease, or by intense emotional engagement. This is not just an Indian peculiarity. It is echoed in China as well. Isabelle Robinet comes to similar conclusions based on her research into Daoist meditation practices. She writes, “Man is not conceived of as a completed whole formed from a single entity. Rather, man appears as a turbulent world whose unity is still to be achieved—as a plurality of forces which must be unified or as a totality which must be realized.”22

Westerners, and perhaps scholars in particular, whose livelihood depends on individual achievement and self-sufficiency and who must commence any study of identity with the view that the individual self is sovereign, unique, and inviolate, find it difficult to comprehend the shadowy frontiers of the individual in India and its cultural acknowledgement of deity and spirit possession. Diana Eck writes appositely of the “distinctively Western habit of thought, grounded primarily in the Western tradition of monotheism: the expectation of singularity and uniqueness, and the valuing of such singularity and uniqueness.”23 Eck refers to James Hillman’s notion of a “‘monotheism of consciousness,’ which has to do not only with our way of thinking about God, but with our way of thinking about persons as ‘individuals,’ our ways of thinking about authority in the structures of family, church, and state, and our way of thinking about questions of truth.”24 This contrasts with the Indian sense of identity grounded in an indigenous religious and cultural imagination, with its marked hesitation to articulate an autonomous individual. Eck continues: “Oneness and manyness are not seen as true opposites. In the Hindu tradition, matters of importance are thought of quite naturally in the singular and the plural. Singularity or uniqueness is not the sole mark of significance.… The profusion of gods and scriptures is matched by a polycentric religious life, social structure, and family structure. There is no one clear, unmistakable center. Manyness is valued; indeed, it is seen as essential.”25 Ariel Glucklich points out that this notion of an inviolate, sovereign self is of recent vintage in the West. He cites Carl Jung in support of this: “Not so very long ago even highly civilized people believed that psychic agencies could influence our minds and feelings. There were ghosts, wizards, and witches, daemons and angels, and even gods, who could produce certain psychological changes in human beings.”26 Glucklich adds, “This kind of thinking resulted not only, or even mainly, from a primitive philosophy but from a porous sense of self lacking rigid external boundaries.”27

Thus, by adhering to culturally and academically bounded assumptions of the singularity and inviolability of the individual, the phenomenon of possession has been analyzed (chiefly by anthropologists, as we have seen, who have claimed it as their bailiwick) as psychological illness, even schizophrenia, as sociological role-playing or status seeking, as expressions of cosmological beliefs, willful manifestation of good or evil, or as an aspect of cultural performance: as anything, in fact, except spirit or deity possession, phenomena that defy both the solid boundaries of the individual assumed by Westerners and the scientific rules of the academic trade.28

The fact is that the individual in India disappeared into family or caste, or into spiritual unity with brahman, or was infiltrated and transfigured by deities and spirits. John Stanley, defending the indigenous voice, contends that during possession states the individual believes that cosmic forces are expressed. He states, “since scientific knowledge is based on empirical experience, a religious experience such as possession which cannot be rationally understood, gets reduced to ‘symbols,’ ‘projections’ or illusions. In this way the reality of possession as a religious experience is ignored by many anthropologists.”29 This may not be a very popular notion among social scientists, many of whom, I daresay, still harbor assumptions that may be labeled “orientalist.” One of the purposes of this book is to question certain orientalist presuppositions. The one to which I refer here is that a particular soul and a particular body are coexistent and are the solitary makers of personal identity—a Western pre-Christian notion that is both elaborated and undermined in various phases of Christian narrativity.30 Possession undercuts this notion, but it is a notion that will prove very difficult to shed, as it is the foundation of the notion of the individual autonomous being, which is in turn the bedrock of the empiricism of the social sciences.

What anthropologists, ethnographers, and historians of religion have failed to recognize is the extended context of what was regarded in India as possession. Most scholarship has limited possession to intrusive and disintegrative states that fall within the realm of graha(ṇa) or else to oracular possession expressed in festival or other ritual contexts. But, as we have seen here, possession has many more dimensions in India, for example, the Buddhist concept of ātmabhāva-parigraha, a person “completely gripped by the experience of the self,” or devotional possession. The former is conceptually close to Vallabhācārya’s saṃsārāveśa, a person “possessed by the cycle of rebirth.” It would be a mistake to disregard these and countless other examples as simply tropes. Such statements were intended more literally than our own tropes, such as “she’s writing like a woman possessed,” or “he’s possessed by love.” For Asvatthāman to be possessed by rage meant that he was possessed by Śiva, not just by the power of Śiva. With respect to devotional possession, Yocum writes: “In no case does Māṇikkavācakar’s—or any other devotee—use his possession as a means for divination, curing, or mediumship.31 Māṇikkavācakar’s possession, his god-intoxication, has no reference to third parties. It is solely a manifestation of his communion with Śiva, which is an end in itself.”32 Similarly, for Ramakrishna possession brought about, and was sometimes equated with, ecstatic vision. Under the control of the goddess, possessed by her, he extended his tongue ecstatically (and transgressively) “to commune with wine, human meat, fish, polluted rice, even feces and urine. Again and again, it reaches out to commune with that which society deems disgusting and shameful.”33 Because this ecstasy is relational, it meets the criteria of āveśa rather than samādhi.

These are the types of thick descriptions that I have been searching for, largely in vain, in Sanskrit literature. We must conclude that in India possession was a state of mind characterized by intensity, emotional excitement, and desire, and that the perceived distinction between these states and those more easily labeled possession by ethnographers and others is a matter of degree rather than kind.34 While we must, on the one hand, recognize a broadly defined category of possession that includes āveśa, praveśa, graha(ṇa), and so on, we might, on the other hand, be better advised to abandon the category entirely in favor of closely related indigenous categories of human experience marked by the permeability of human identity. If for no other reason, this may be recommended in order to heal the stigma left by the application of the category “possession.” Although I have not found it practical to do that here, I have left sufficient room for that to serve as the basis for a future undertaking.
