+++
title = "03 Sudden and Gradual"

+++
I cannot disagree with Gombrich’s statement that “brahmanism inculcates control,” but I believe that such a notion must be nuanced based on the foregoing discussions. We have established that possession is a liminal state of mind,35 with mundane concerns and discourse reconfigured though not ignored. We have also seen that “positive” possession almost always emerges from ritual. Such ritual works in one of two basic ways. The first, brahmanical, inculcates a controlled state of possession through the observance of complicated and precise processes. The second, typically non-brahmanical in the sense of non-Sanskritic (this was never a disincentive to brahman participation),36 encourages possession by inculcating strategies for release rather than control. The former amounts to a guided gradual transformation through metamorphosis, while the latter amounts to a guided sudden release. In both cases we are speaking of ritual that depicts the tension between freedom and discipline. Although the gradualists are beset with a greater number of formal rules, in both cases style and structure are important, conferring a sense of rigorousness that is essential for materialization of the process.

The “gradualist school” is sastraic, analytical, and process-oriented, while the “sudden school” (apologies to Zen aficionados) creates release through intense emotional engagement. The former bears the ritualist into a state of ontological hybridity through a series of identifications, while the latter accomplishes the same through a wholesale submersion into an idealized form of a deity (such as Kālī or Hanumān), a mood (love, ferocity, quiescence, etc.), or an environment (e.g., Krishna’s līlās). Brahmanical hybridity may be thought of as a tapestry, a planned and executed complex pattern woven on a single uniform backing. In this particular tapestry each essence, deity, spirit, or other entity occupies a discrete space on or within the body, empowering and transfiguring it. This usually requires the complementary observance of brahmanical rites of purification. Compared to “sudden school” strategies, it inculcates control by keeping the consciousness and intentionality of the ritualist intact and dominant. It is neither festival nor oracular and may be very private. Yet it is a metamorphosis, but it cannot be called shape-shifting. Thus, I argue, it is fair to label it possession. In the sudden school, the hybridity is more deeply rooted, as two beings or essences coexist, with one supplanting another in an internal and idiosyncratic scale of identity markers. Unlike in gradualist possession, the intentionality and decision making capabilities of the agent are ambiguous and often absent. Bynum would label the former as metamorphosis and the latter alone as hybridization. But I would disagree with that assessment in this context. Both, it seems to me, are hybrids in different formulations. Bynum writes: “Metamorphosis breaks down categories by breaching them; hybrid forces contradictory or incompatible categories to coexist and serve as commentary on the other.”37 Bynum’s analysis of metamorphosis based on medieval Christian narrative cannot be readily applied to the array of material in South Asia. In brahmanical possession, the process of metamorphosis transforms categories of bodily integrity by breaking them down and rebuilding them analytically. The result is a hybrid being seamlessly constituted out of a collocation of compatible entities or notions. This is in contrast to non-brahmanical possession, in which contradictory or incompatible beings, entities, notions, or categories may exist.

The orthodox impulse, which does not have the marks of a conspiracy, has been to control this phenomenon through benign neglect, by ignoring or avoiding it in formal discourse, by tacitly declaring it irrelevant,38 though we have seen here that possession is acknowledged or discussed in more than 170 Sanskrit texts.39 This is not a large number, however, considering the vast number of texts in Sanskrit. Perhaps as the ultimate form of emotional engagement, possession can assume a place in Indic intellectual culture only by confining it in nonthreatening ritual, making it retrievable through occasional fable and story, or locating it in the discourses of engagement described in this volume.

Nyāsa, the brahmanical practice of possession, has a restricted domain because of its locus within rarefied Sanskritic culture. But in the larger cultural domain, it is closely juxtaposed with other orbits of ritual, including small séances or festivals in which oracular possession might occur. The evidence for this is both textual (the brahman Bhujyu Lahyayani’s presence at the séances held by the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya and my own analysis herein of svasthāvesa) and ethnographic (cf. Sax, Hancock, and others who write of brahman participation in “non-brahman” possession ritual). What Pollock calls the “massive presence of discursive domination in Sanskrit culture,”40 does not, apparently, figure into this aspect of Indic culture. We are accustomed to imagining India’s being pervaded by philosophical doctrines of control and a self (ātman) situated in a straightforward relationship with either an abstract absolute (brahman) or a single supreme deity. Equally significant and pervasive, however, were a hybridized self and notions of identity that were open, permeable, and without fixed boundaries. Examination of the phenomenon of possession (and its typological kinfolk) demonstrates that the “notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual” hardly existed in “Sanskrit culture.” Multiple or hybrid identities were sanctioned, indeed often idealized, in the literate cultures of classical India (which is to say they were not considered pathological), even as they were appropriated—in fact induced—by techniques of ritual, yoga, and Vedānta. Pervasion by soma, the transfer of an essence like medhas, influencing the actions of another as a result of entering his or her body with one’s mind, disease—particularly mental—induced by the entrance of destructive spirits, shifts in consciousness as a result of initiatory experience or devotional absorption into a deity, and so on—all erode the “notion of a self-subsistent and unencumbered individual.” The power of the gradualist school was somewhat deceptive, except on paper, where it reigned supreme, and very few Indians, save a few hopeful brahmans, accepted the “discursive domination of Sanskritic culture” in matters religious when deeply emotional and richly transformative possession was available.

The ideologies, and to a lesser extent the processes, of gradual and sudden possession are dialogical; they negotiate in both directions: less privileged nonelite nonprofessionals poach on the discourse of privileged elite professionals by adopting their symbols and images, thus demarcating a realm of social and political safety for their experience, while the elites, the priesthoods, extend their domain by creating discourse mechanisms through which they domesticate popular practice. As shown in culture after culture, elite participation in popular practice contributes to this negotiation between professionals and nonprofessionals, highly educated elites and less-educated subalterns. Thus, at the risk of appearing immoderately Dumontian, I find myself in substantial agreement with Madeleine Biardeau, who writes: “From the beginning of my Indological studies, I have been quite convinced that Hindu society was much less divided ideologically, that the top and the bottom were not so utterly alien to each other, than was usually contended, particularly among anthropologists.”41
