+++
title = "05 Bringing It All Back Home: The Mahābhārata and Traditions of Possession"

+++
As pointed out earlier, most Indic possession can be spun from the MBh: from the tales of two kings, Nala and Kalmāṣapāda, who experienced very different kinds of possession; from the story of Asvatthāman, arguably the most heinous villain in an epic with an outsized cast of reprehensible characters; from the protective possession of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, the composed and dutiful, yet inscrutably uncertain, pupil of the powerful sage Devaśarman; and from the tale of the birth of Skanda, which for millennia has served as the exemplar for certain demonologies in āyurvedic and tantric texts and, doubtless, in popular culture as well. Fictional though these characters may be, they connect directly to enduring features of South Asian religious and narrative culture, both Sanskritic and non-Sanskritic. Possession by the Skandas, the bālagrahas or childsnatchers, or other allied invasive agents of negative possession are not addressed further here, as I have dealt with them sufficiently. Nor do I address further the topic of possession identified as escalation of emotional engagement, except to emphasize, first, that it too can be traced in considerable measure to epic discourse and, second, that devotional possession, a form of intense emotional engagement that has its origins in a culture of mixed classicism, folk religion, and a probable early layer of shamanistic practice, has been explained in Sanskritic and certain folk cultures in terms of Sanskritic aesthetic categories.

Instead, we close by revisiting some of the primary characters depicted in MBh tales of possession. In the final analysis, the trauma of Nala’s possession was absorbed largely by himself and Damayantī, as he eventually regained his kingdom, reputation, and status, and everyone lived happily ever after, albeit with greater wisdom and maturity; Asvatthaman’s and Kalmāṣapāda’s possessions were malevolent, even viciously so; while Vipula’s possession emerged as a challenging if sanguine act of service to his guru. All four possessions were violent, though in the fourth, that of Vipula, the violence was veiled, assuming the forms of threat and intimidation. Nala’s possession was destructive to his personal and professional life—he lost his wife, his kingdom, his wealth, his identity and self-esteem, and, eventually, as part of a violent exorcism, his body, too, became disfigured and unrecognizable. Yet Asvatthāman, through the most gruesomely violent possession, became more distinctly himself, his genetic links to Śiva, Death (antaka), Lust (kāma), and Anger (krodha) emerging conspicuously. Kalmāṣapāda, bidden by the possessing rākṣasa Kiṃkara to indulge in compulsive cannibalism, suffered a possession potentially more lethal to himself than even Nala’s. Eclipse of the self, its erasure through violence or extreme disruption, marks all these possessions. This is similar to the oracular possession recorded by ethnographers throughout South Asia as well as in disease-producing possession recorded from the Atharvaveda to Caraka and Susruta to modern āyurvedic and nonmedical healing practice (e.g., at Bālājī or Chottanikkara).

With the self now cast into doubt, I return to the epigraph from Shulman that opened this chapter, regarding the preferability of a self. Let us inquire what kind of a self he is talking about and whether it is a viable option for the possessed or is possible only for the dispossessed, which is to say, for one whose identity is not under assault, who has not experienced the disruptive openness of possession, who has not struggled with competing voices or personalities, or with the visceral attractiveness of extreme dissociation. Shulman continues his inquiry into the possibility of a self, identifying it as “[s]omething minimally integrated and not wholly discontinuous, where memory, or its more powerful and personal multiform, forgetting, could reside. Something to hide and veil, if need be, in the interests of preserving ultimacy in some residual, individual form. Even a fictive self might do.”46

Although I acknowledge the question of fictive selves, which many, including some of India’s most important philosophers, would argue is the only self we have, it is more pressing at this point to return to Nala, Shulman’s immediate concern: to his loss of self through possession by Kali, the personification of the worst of times, and his eventual emergence “from the shadowy mirror-state to a kind of personhood.”47 Nala’s personality, including his sense of his self, which is to say, his self-possession, was, compared to that of many of the other epic characters, arguably underdeveloped. As the narrative analogue to the Pāṇḍava king Yudhiṣṭhira, he was dharma incarnate, warts and all, his tenuous control over his personal life mirroring Dharmaraja’s ironic moniker “steady in battle” (yudhi-sthira). Nala became truly human only after his harrowing adventure with Kali, brought about, we might recall, by a breach in an ostensibly minor matter of ritual purity. Before his trifling but egregious slip-up, his persona was the very incarnation of rectitude and righteousness; he was, above all, an advertisement for the safety of uncomplicated virtue. With the onset of his possession by Kali, however, he morphed into a man troubled and lost, demonstrating the decisiveness of possession and the fragility of such uncomplicated virtue. We see a tenderness in his love for Damayantī slipping through the cracks in his possession, as he quietly tears himself away from her in the dark forest night, stealing loving glances at her while abandoning her, he believes, for her own good. Although he is archetypally the royal (and regal) hero, his heroism and capacity for self-possession matures only after he is forced to confront his own personal demon. His road to recovery, however, is unexpectedly medical. Bitten by the Nāga king Karkoṭaka, whose poison slowly weakens the grip of the entropic Kali, Nala eventually vomits him out.48 This is quite different from the norm in the MBh in which, for example, King Kalmāṣapāda’s possession by a vicious rākṣasa was cured by ensorcelled water sprinkled on him by the ṛṣi Vasiṣṭha. In āyurvedic terms, Nala was cured through scientific or rational treatment (yuktivyapāśrayacikitsā), even if the curative agent, poison, was administered by a nāga, while King Kalmāṣapāda was cured through ritual means (daivavyapāśrayacikitsā).

The connection of Āyurveda with nāgas is vouchsafed in the myth of the “churning of the ocean of milk” (samudramanthana; MBh 1.16). In this famous story, the mighty serpent Vāsuki served as the rope wrapped around Mount Mandara, which served as the vertical churning wood (araṇi), placed on the back of the tortoise king Akupāra, who served as the lower flat churning wood. The serpentine rope was pulled at opposite ends by the devas and the asuras in their efforts to churn out the much-sought-after elixir of immortality (amṛta). Eventually, Dhanvantari, the legendary founder and patron saint of Āyurveda, was produced, holding the vessel with the elixir.49 Regardless of the fact that celestial bedlam ensued, the connection was secured, thus conferring rationale to Karkoṭaka’s gift of the poisonous healing elixir.

In addition, we see several links in these stories to possession as it has been textually represented and popularly practiced. Although Nala’s possession may be insufficiently remarked on in what has become a popular romance and narrative of devotion,50 the cure, at least, reflects popular and āyurvedic practice, where vomiting, induced by mildly poisonous substances (e.g., white śaṅkhapuṣpi mixed with milk), is employed in Kerala as part of exorcistic practice. Possession here becomes Nala’s physical disability, which empowers the spirit of the waters to produce, out of itself, an antibiotic. The exorcism for King Kalmāṣapāda, by contrast, works in the opposite direction. Rather than seeking the spirits of the deep for a cure, he is cured by the sages, which is to say, from above rather than below. The realm of ritual is the domain of the sages, while the realm of medicine is, by association, the domain of the nāgas.

Turning to Asvatthaman’s possession, its cultural continuity is vouchsafed in its performance in the annual Draupadī festivals in Tamilnadu. The actors transform the violence and devastation of Asvatthaman’s deadly march through the Pāṇḍava army into a victory march, as Draupadī leads her troops across burning coals in a remarkable display of ecstatic fire-walking. The cultural sense of Asvatthaman’s mythic violence is reduced to its most recognizable and resonant culture significator—pure focused intensity—and is transformed into a blissful and liberating experience of possession.

In Vipula’s case, the link is to initiatory possession. It is uncertain whether Vipula’s ability to possess other people was part of an initiatory practice, like that seen much later in the northern and eastern tantric material. The process employed by Vipula (he entered his limbs and face into hers, remaining within her, unmoving, invisible, like a shadow) is, as we have seen, strongly reminiscent of the descriptions of “transfer of essence” from father to son when the father is approaching death (BĀU 1.5.17, Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad 2.14). It also closely resembles the later descriptions by the commentators on Yogasūtras 3.38 on the physical processes necessary to engineer possession, as well as on Hemacandra’s description of possession in the Jain Yogaśāstra. Thus, this kind of yogic possession has both mythic and practical foundations, giving it the basic requirements and appearance of a “tradition.”

Thus, possession casts extreme doubt on the viability of the socially constructed individual, as he or she swings from bliss and integration to terror and fragmentation, an alternation of saṃyoga and viprayoga, unity and separation, recognition and alienation, as the bhakti saints would see it. The problem refuses to go away and is presented afresh in each generation. Perhaps the central insight of possession is the recognition and acceptance of self as other, an insight that also casts doubt on the psychoanalytic project of reclaiming submerged parts of the self as an exercise in regaining wholeness, as Shulman reminds us.51 Although this project is to a great extent shared by Indian philosophers, who have theorized it through adopting and adapting the associative thinking of the Vedas, it can be successful only after dispersion and alienness are recognized as facts of life. Convergences can be anticipated, even guided, idealized, and perhaps achieved in a grand reconciliation of self-possession. But the difficult, perhaps irreconcilable, problem remains the acceptance of one’s own multivocality.
