+++
title = "02 Svasthāveśa and the Prasenā"

+++
Of the two primary divisions of possession, involuntary and voluntary, the former found textual bases principally in the specialized fields of āyurvedic and tantric exorcistic literature.24 However, voluntary possession, particularly that with an oracular component, appears to have been regarded as more suitable material for textuality. Two reasons may be cited for this. First, because it could be practiced, hence prescribed—and, in general, prescription was formalized through literary production. Precedents for the commission of such material to the written word are found in the literature on omens and portents, dating back to the Vedic vidhāna literature,25 scattered passages from the Sanskrit epics, and the landmark works of the astrologer and mathematician Varāhamihira around 550 C.E.26 In addition, possession was experienced as a symptom of tantric initiation, as we have seen, and for this reason it took on greater soteriological, hence literary, urgency.27 Its commission to textuality was part of an ongoing process of domesticating the ever-receding fringe, part of the expansion of Sanskritic culture into new areas of discourse that extended from the periphery to the center. This is likely a case of Sanskritization in which popular practice was brought into the realm of brahmanical orthodoxy, albeit to a place on the fringe of such orthodoxy. Sanskritization in this case might have also mitigated the threat possession presented to more normative brahmanical orthodoxy.28 This threat was of a total and unrecognizable transcendence that undermined orthodox notions of purity and an independent and impermeable ātman or self. Transcendence achieved during a state of full possession, known to many but experienced by relatively few,29 not only eroded confidence in a stable self, which now hosted other voices, but also annihilated the wellformed and complex personality, the carefully, if culturally, crafted person that served as custodian to the self. Thus, possession negated both the metaphysical and social entities, the self and the person.30

The two key Sanskrit terms that are given momentum in the Śaiva texts and define our present investigation reflect this Sanskritization, this movement from periphery to center, are svasthāvesa and prasenā. The former, as mentioned, is positive, oracular possession, a state of health (svasthā) that by its very designation must be distinguished from negative, disease-producing possession. Svasthāvesa thus indicates voluntary or invited possession of deities or middle-level spirits for the purpose of divination, while negative possession, for which there also exists no single descriptive or denotative term,31 is involuntary possession brought on by the independent agency of malevolent spirits or lower ranking semidivine beings for destructive purposes. Because an extended discussion of early Indic demonologies (bhūtavidyā) appears in Chapter 12’s discussion of āyurvedic texts, it is necessary to mention here only that the taxonomy of spirits and deities migrated to China with material trade and Buddhism.32

Of particular interest, however, is a spirit not noted in any āyurvedic text: the prasenā, a spirit mentioned, as far as I am aware, only in these tantric texts, and in Tibetan and Chinese Esoteric Buddhist texts. Neither the word prasenā nor its variant pratisenā, found in a few Sanskrit Buddhist texts, is listed in this sense in any Sanskrit dictionary.33 The word prasena (with a short, rather than long, final a) appears in the Sanskrit lexicons only as a proper name; never does it appear in its literal meaning, in spite of its clear martial associations (Skt. senā [army]).34 However, prasenā is found in its Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA) variant, pasiṇa, in the Pāiasaddamahaṇṇavo (Prākṛtaśabda-mahārṇavaḥ, PSM), a Prakrit-Hindi dictionary compiled in the 1920s. In this entry, it is defined as a minor female deity who, through metonymy, becomes identified with the divinatory practice in which she was the primary oracle. In this way, the prasenā largely escaped the purview of mainstream Sanskritic culture.

What is striking is that the Sanskrit prasenā appears to be derived from the MIA pasiṇa, the Prakrit form of the Sanskrit prasna [question]. Prasenā, then, is a back formation, derived from a non-Sanskrit word that has been subsequently Sanskritized. I am indebted to Alexis Sanderson for this insight and for forwarding to me references to some of the texts through which this can be proved.35 This is confirmed by the PSM, which cites Jaina texts that predate or are contemporaneous with the Kashmiri and other northern material and provide a meaning for pasiṇa that is very close to that of prasenā in the svasthāvesa ritual. The PSM glosses pasiṇa as “calling a deity into a mirror, etc.; a special kind of mantric knowledge,”36 citing the Jaina Āyaraṃgasutta (Ācārāṅga Sūtra) and Ṭhānaṃgasutta (Sthānāṅga Sūtra).37 The former had a long history of textual composition and accretion and contains some of the earliest Jaina writings, dating to the last centuries B.C.E. However, the later portions consist of separable texts that include exegetical commentary on the earlier parts as well as exhaustive accounts of monastic behavior.

Among these later portions is the Niśītha Cūrṇi, composed in the mid-seventh century by the prolific Jaina scholar Jinadāsagaṇi Mahattara.38 This is likely the section of the Āyaraṃgasutta that the PSM cites.39 The earlier parts are much too early to include any mention of the word prasenā. The PSM also cites the term pasiṇāpasiṇā, employing the feminine pasiṇā, attested here as well as in the Jaina Pravacanasārodhāra and the Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya (available in manuscript only). This term, which could be rendered in Sanskrit as prasenā-prasna (the art of resolving questions through the mediation of a prasenā), is glossed by the PSM as “calling a deity in dream, etc., through the power of mantric knowledge, after which it relates the fruit, both auspicious and inauspicious.”40

According to the Niśītha Cūrṇi, a question is asked of a pasiṇā, which had entered one’s thumbnail (aṃguṭṭha-pasiṇā) or arm, the leftovers after eating a sweet called kaṃsāra, a piece of cloth, a mirror, a sword blade, water, or a wall. Pasiṇāpasiṇā, according to this text, is also a kind of divination in which a question is answered by a pasiṇā who appears in a dream, thus confirming that the PSM drew its definition from this late section of the Āyaraṃgasutta. This pasiṇā is called “dream deity” or “dream-divination” (suviṇā-pasiṇā).41 It must be noted that the northern and eastern (and subsequently the Tibetan and Chinese) use of this kind of divination may well have been adopted, at least partially and indirectly, from these Jaina sects.

The word praśna, which lies at the root of this divinatory practice, means not only “question” (it is the primary word for “question” in Sanskrit) but also “horary astrology,” a usage traced at least to Varāhamihira, who uses it in this sense in the Bṛhatsaṃhitā.42 This sense persists into modern astrological practice (jyotiṣa). The two primary tasks of Indian astrology are prediction and fixing times and places for auspicious events. This is no less the case in horary astrology, in which the client asks the astrologer a question about the past, present, or future, and the astrologer answers based on the current position of the planets, rather than on the client’s natal horoscope. Because of the difficulty of determining specific birth times before the modern era of precise timekeeping, most premodern astrology in India was praśna. Eventually, it appears, praśna/pasiṇa became a more generally employed word for “divinatory practice”; it was subsequently feminized as pasiṇā or prasenā and identified as a spirit or minor deity that could be invited into the body of the practitioner or a child, or into an inanimate object, and reveal answers to questions about the past, present, and future.43

The word prasena is used by Bhaṭṭotpala (or Utpala) in his commentary (Vivṛti) on Bṛhatsaṃhitā 2.15. Varahamihira’s verse translates: “One who is instructed through magic [kuhaka-], possession [āvesa-], or by any concealed being, or from hearing [advice whispered] in the ear should never be consulted; such a person is not an astrologer [daivavit].”44 Utpala expands these exclusionary categories. He glosses kuhaka- as indrajāla- (Indra’s net), a more common term for “sorcery” or “magic.” He adds the category prasenā (prasenādikena). Āveśa, he says, means “entrance of a body by a deity, etc.” (devatādidehapraveśena).45 Concealed beings (pihita-) are those whose bodies are covered and unseen. All of these, he says, speak with disembodied voices after they situate themselves in cavities of rocks, in walls, and so on. An entity that whispers in the ear, he says, is a karṇapiśāca (ear demon).46 Those who control karṇapiśācas are well known in the world, Utpala adds. After they master certain mantras, the karṇapiśāca will reveal to them anything they want.47 Utpala offers a second interpretation. He says that those who have questions should sit around a child in a circle. The child’s father then subjects him to a certain ritual and listens to the clients’ issues. The child will then articulate the answers to the questions. My impression is that Utpala had limited knowledge of this practice and appears to have regarded it as possession; perhaps he observed such a session. It is more likely that he merely heard about it from others, as his account has a definite secondhand texture to it.

That Bhaṭṭotpala was Kashmiri must not be overlooked.48 It was in northern and eastern India that the practice of svasthāvesa through employing a prasenā to speak through the mouth of a child received its greatest impetus. We shall discuss this material momentarily. But what both Varāhamihira, who lived in Ujjain in the sixth century and who declined to grant authority to āveśa in any form, and Bhaṭṭotpala, who expanded Varahamihira’s exclusionary categories, pointedly argue is that knowledge that is neither scientifically verifiable nor systematically obtained, which is to say through a recognized lineage, is valid. Varāhamihira understood that the nature of astrological and other forms of classifiable but fluidly realized knowledge, such as lore associated with omens and portents, invited frauds, amateurs, and charlatans.49 Thus, in the second chapter of the Bṛhatsaṃhitā he attempted to delineate professional standards. This was obviously a delicate topic that required firmness by both the author and the commentator. What it also demonstrates, above and beyond the situating of arcana as a sastra or legitimate body of knowledge, is the division between “folk” and “classical” that was readily perceived by the bearers of Sanskritic culture in the first millennium. Varahamihira’s exposition also illumines his efforts to encroach upon the margins of folk culture by incorporating certain elements of it into the Sanskritic mainstream.50 Despite the apparent ease with which Sanskrit literati co-opted or classicized folk elements, the division between folk and classical always remained sharp, even if the contours of the division proved variable or fluid. Indeed, the awareness of inside and outside, and the readiness to blur and amalgamate alterity, was in India one of the keys to the surprising duration of the control by the Sanskrit literati of a variety of discourse modes. This control, as well as the ever-shifting distinction between folk and classical, was often presented as little more than an exercise by the literati to uphold the epistemological requirements of Sanskritic knowledge systems.51 Indeed, what most people, including brahmans, did in practice was surely quite different. This is the situation today, and there is sufficient evidence in Sanskrit texts of all periods to demonstrate that it was the case in antiquity. Thus, the discourse models adopted by Varāhamihira, Bhaṭṭotpala, and most Sanskritic philosophers and systematizers, omitted the inconsistencies that we find, for example, in similar literature in China, as the work of Strickmann and Davis testifies.

An example of the Sanskritization to which we refer, and the challenge to accepted Sanskritic epistemological agendas, is the employment of children as central in Sanskritic ritual. This certainly represented an encroachment of popular practice into the corpus of Sanskritic culture, as there is no evidence for it in earlier vedic, epic, or purāṇic ritual. Nor is there evidence that it is an innovation of mid- to late first-millennium tantric systematizers. The engagement of children as spiritual factotums in adult rituals thus subverts ritual boundaries that are, for the most part, set by the Vedic ritual theorists, who do not grant children adhikāra for Vedic ritual performance. Indeed, even in the Tantras that are key to our understanding of both the ritual use of children and the incumbent epistemological process, this subject is mentioned only sporadically. Nevertheless, these are the passages that we must examine here. Children are as capable as adults of understanding and responding to ritual,52 and, apropos of our current project, it is the Chinese rather than the Indians who appear to have recognized and legitimated this capability in texts that offer thicker descriptions of the responses of children to such ritual. Regardless of whose texts may be more revealing, the question of the use of children is an important one. I speculate on this below; but it may be said now that inducing possession in another person, whether in an adult or a child, rather than in an inanimate object or in oneself, not only was good theater but also gave the impression that the responsibility of agency and the temptation to manipulate results were reduced, which doubtless conferred a greater sense of authority and authenticity upon both the oracle or medium and the intermediary ritual officiant.

As in the Jaina Prakrit and Kashmiri Sanskrit texts, in Tibet and East Asia the terms cognate to pasiṇa/prasenā denoted both the tantric ritual and the deity that mediated the oracular experience. In a few esoteric Buddhist texts of the Kālacakra tradition, notably the Sekoddeśa, which appears to have been a section of the “root” Kalacakra Tantra (the Paramādibuddha or Kālacakramūla Tantra),53 and Kalkin Puṇḍarīka’s Vimalaprabhā on the Laghukālacakra Tantra, the term pra phab-pa, a translation of the Sanskrit pratisenā (prognostic image), is attested in the Tibetan versions.54 This is surely a variant of prasenā. It also appears in chapter 43 of the Cakrasaṃvara-Tantra, in a verse that reads, “Having repeated the mantra over a sword, water, one’s thumb, a lamp or a mirror, one will cause the descent of the divinatory image [prasenā] by means of the yoga of oneself [as the deity].”55 This is clearly drawn from earlier Indic material.

Giacomella Orofino has written an important and informative article on the Tibetan art of mirror divination, in which pratisenā occupies a major place.56 Orofino understands pratisenā as “a hyper-Sanskritization of the word prasenā, a term of uncertain etymon.”57 We have here dealt with the etymology, though Orofino is incorrect in labeling pratisenā a hyper-Sanskritization.58 The commentator on the Tibetan version of the Sekoddeśa, Nāropā, cites a text called the Pratisenāvatāratantra (Tib. pra dbab pa la ‘jug pa’i rgyud), now lost, which, he says, enumerates eight kinds of prognostication, all of which, it seems, we may regard as varieties of svasthāvesa.
