+++
title = "03 Epigraphical Evidence for the Practice of Svasthāveśa"

+++
We now turn to the Himalayan and eastern rite of svasthāvesa, not losing sight of our objective of comparing it to the manuscript material from China of the same period and southern India of later epochs. Although the relevant Tantras are themselves undated, Sanderson suggests that one of the earliest, the Nisvāsaguhya, could be a product of the sixth century, though it can be dated with certainty only to a single ninth-century Nepalese manuscript. Thus, Sanderson states that, though the Nisvāsaguhya “seems to be one of the very earliest Tantras of the Siddhānta,” it is nevertheless representative of “a tradition for which we have epigraphical evidence from the sixth century onwards.”59 Sanderson’s remaining texts, which describe svasthāvesa in greater complexity and variation, were composed at various times up to the twelfth century. The epigraphical evidence to which Sanderson refers is important because it helps establish a general dateline for the diffusion of svasthāvesa to China. This evidence exposes a Śaiva tradition from Central and South India that appears to have entered Kashmir only in the first few decades of the eighth century with the ascendancy of Lalitāditya, the wealthiest and most successful of Kashmir’s imperial monarchs. It is worth noting that Lalitāditya and his successors patronized both brahmanical sects and Buddhism, establishing a climate conducive for intellectual exchange. Given the strong tantric presence in Kashmir at that time, this active exchange of ideas quickly engendered a common tantric foundation for Hindu and Buddhist sects.

Sanderson and others have extensively explored the epigraphical evidence for the background of northern Tantrism. Among the most important epigraphia are the following:60 (1) A hoard of nine copperplate inscriptions of a local monarch named Mahāsivagupta Bālārjuna discovered in Sirpur (Śrīpura, the ancient capital of Dakṣiṇa Kosala; Raipur District, Chattisgarh), which includes records of grants to Śaiva ācāryas. This is shown by their initiation names, which confirms that the Śaiva Siddhānta was established by the second half of the sixth century.61 (2) The Senakapāṭ stone slab inscription issued in the fifty-seventh year of the reign of Śivagupta (c. 647).62 This records a grant to an ascetic named Sadāsivācārya, who, the inscription implies, is the lineage successor to an ascetic named Sadyaḥśivācārya who hailed from a hermitage (tapovana) called Amardaka.63 The latter is also a name of Kalabhairava, a form of Śiva dominant in this tradition, who, as we see below, is closely affiliated with the possession deities in some of our texts.64 It is also important that this hermitage is the parent institution of most of the Saiddhāntika lineages recorded in inscriptions, lineages that eventually became ascendant in Kashmir. (3) Inscriptions recording the Śaiva initiations to several important southern monarchs in the latter half of the seventh century.65 Although this is evidence for the broad dissemination of Śaiva lineages, the inscriptions do not take note of specific practices. Nevertheless, linguistic and cultural evidence permit us to speculate on the range of practices that constituted the divinatory milieu of svasthāvesa.

It is striking that the year 647 is mentioned; this coincides with the conclusion of Harṣavardhana’s reign in northern India (r. 607–647). It was in approximately this year that his court poet Bāṇa wrote the Harṣacarita (The Deeds of Harṣa), a hagiographical description of Harṣa and his reign. This well-known and exemplary text includes the earliest attested mention of the term svasthāvesa, referring in one passage to a kind of powder used to induce it.66 This is noteworthy because the later Sanskrit manuscripts of South India, to be discussed below, require scented and powdered ash (bhasma) from an offertory fire ritual (homa) as one of the ingredients. Together with the Jaina evidence, this suggests that svasthāvesa had by this time entered into the general currency of cross-disciplinary esoteric practice,67 even if textual mention of it was rare. This, however, is not surprising, as Harṣa was known for his tolerance toward both heterodox and orthodox sects and took an active role in bringing them together. Indeed, along with twenty kings, the most eminent śramaṇas and brāhmaṇa are said to have attended a great assembly he once convened in his capital city, Kanyākubja. It is at convocations such as this that exchange of knowledge that contributed directly or indirectly to the formation of svasthāveśa ritual could have occurred.
