+++
title = "06 Aweishe: The Indic Character of Chinese Possession"

+++
Strickmann and Davis cite several texts that contain material strongly reminiscent of Indic and Tibetan āveśa and svasthāvesa. Indeed, the Chinese employ the word aweishe  a direct transcription of āvesa, “to designate possession rites in which a spirit was invoked into the living body of a medium. The term might also apply to procedures in which the spirit of a living person was co-opted, so to speak, into the pantheon.”94 Strickmann and Davis cite a large number of passages, including one from the Amoghapāśasūtra,95 which strikingly resemble Orofino’s description of childhood possession in the Tibetan Subāhuparipṛcchānāmatantra. According to Strickmann, the Amoghapāśasūtra, which was translated from Sanskrit into Chinese around the end of the seventh century, was the first Chinese Buddhist text to give instructions for inducing deity possession. It was at this point, says Strickmann, that a “new Tantric synthesis was about to become known in China”96 The purpose of this aweishe ritual, which invokes Guanyin (=Avalokitesvara), was therapeutic, to heal an individual suffering from spirit-induced illness. The passage is not an isolated ritual option, but occurs in a more general discussion of ritual healing. The entire passage is worth citing:

Or again, there is this method. If it is desired to enchant a person, the spell-possessor should bathe himself and put on fresh garments. Next he should recite the spirit-spell to protect his own person. Then he is to construct a ritual area using cow dung, making it square and painting it in the appropriate colors, strewing assorted flowers, and setting out various white-colored food-offerings. Next he should take a virgin boy or girl, bathe the child, and imbue its body with fine fragrances. He should clothe it in a pure white garment and adorn it with all manner of ornaments. He should then have the child sit cross-legged in the ritual area; he recites the spell bandha (“bind”) and he plaits the child’s hair. When he is done reciting the spell and plaiting the hair, he takes more flowers and fills the child’s hands with them. In addition, he takes fine quality incense, crushes and scatters it. Then, additionally, he recites a spell over uncooked rice, which he sprinkles, together with flowers and water, within the ritual area. Next he should burn sandalwood incense and recite Kuan-yin’s spirit-spell; he should recite it three times over the flowers and then cast them in the child’s face. Then the child’s body will begin to tremble. If you wish it to speak, pronounce another spell [given in the text] over pure water and sprinkle it in his face. As you recite the spell, be sure that your hand does not touch the child. When you have recited in this manner, the child will speak. If you ask about good or evil things in the past, future, or present, it will be able to answer all your questions. If the spell-holder wishes to send away the spirit who has lodged in the child, there is another spell given which he should recite.97

In fact, the phenomenon of child possession receives much more attention in Chinese religious texts than in South Asian or Tibetan ones. Whether this indicates greater occurrence of this kind of svasthāvesa in China is an open question. Although I suspect that this was the case, it is also possible that the Chinese texts were simply more richly descriptive of such activity and more amenable to including the experiences of non-elite groups, whereas the South Asian prescriptive material was more vigilantly or fastidiously spare and brahmanical. There is little point in reviewing all the examples set forth in Strickmann’s books. He does, however, translate and comment on the Chinese translation of the Subāhuparipṛcchā, where Posseu-na, Sseu-na or the god Po reveals desired knowledge after being caused to descend into objects similar to those on the list in the Kashmiri Sanskrit material.98

Strickmann comments on some of the terms discussed here. He recognizes the importance of the word prasenā, admitting that its origin is obscure. He suggests, incorrectly it seems, that it might be related to the name Prasenajit.99 However, the Bukkyōgo daijiten, a Japanese dictionary of Buddhist terms, gives the transliteration of prasena (here, contrary to Strickmann’s texts) in Chinese as poluosai  a kind of chess game based on military formations that use elephants and horses, also called xiangqi 100 This is based on Fazang’s  (643–712) commentary on the Chinese translation of the Brahmajāla sūtra (Fanwang jing ), the Fanwang jing shu  What this suggests is that the name Prasenajit, which in any case is much too early to indicate one who is victorious over a spirit called prasenā, probably means “one who is victorious over a ruler whose military strategy included formations of elephants and horses.”101 As for the Tibetan pra pha[b]-pa, he rightly translates this as “to make a pra spirit descend.”102 Both Strickmann and Davis suggest that the entry abhisha (the Japanese transcription of the Sanskrit āveśa) in Hōbōgirin (I:7ab) indicates that hashina, the Japanese term for the āveśa ceremony, may also be derived from the Sanskrit praśna, again from the questions that are put to the medium by the performer of the ritual or his client.103

Davis’s work also demonstrates that during the seventh and eighth centuries the terminology and character of certain varieties of divination took on a decidedly South Asian character. During these centuries, the “aweishe rite” was introduced through esoteric Mahāyāna Buddhism. Davis discusses at length this rite and the general question of the use of prepubescent mediums. He says, in part:

All in all, the āveśa rituals seem to have been not too distant from the most popular kind of séance performed by the Tang-dynasty spirit-medium for officials and members of the aristocracy. In these séances the spirit-medium summoned a divinity either into himself or into some other localized place. Then he either answered himself, or communicated the divinity’s responses to, specific questions posed by the supplicant about “good and evil fortune,” “matters past, present, and future,” or “things yet to come.” What has changed in the āveśa rites is the fact that the spirit-medium’s trance was officiated by a Tantric master and resulted from the power conferred on the master by his own identification with a Buddhist deity. In The Rules of Āveśa as Explained by the Deva Maheśvara, a text in one short scroll submitted to the throne by Amoghavajra, the officiant or “practicant,” as he is called, must first transform himself into the eponymous Maheśvara, thereby empowering the mantras and mudrās he then employs to compel an “emissary of Maheśvara” to possess the children. The text notes that after the appropriate spell has been recited seven times, “the boys and girls will tremble violently, causing one to realize that the “Holy One” (shengzhe) had entered their bodies.104

Davis indicates that the children were placed on yantras, though he does not describe them. He informs us, however, that “the Tantric master recites various incantations to summon one or more Buddhist deities, sometimes identified, sometimes not, into either a luminous, reflective object (water, mirror, jewel, pearl), the image or icon of the divinity, or the body of a child.”105

From two to ten boys or girls between the ages of eight and fourteen were possessed. They were subjected to elaborate purifications after their eligibility had been confirmed as a result of meeting certain requirements in physical appearance. The Chinese texts state that “when the divinity has descended into the children, they will speak of ‘all matters past, present, and future,’ of ‘things yet to come,’ or of ‘good or evil fortune,’ or that they will be able to answer any question asked of the god.”106 Two of the texts require the children “to gaze into a mirror, which had either been purified with ash from a homa offering or otherwise empowered by the divinity, and then to answer all manner of questions based on what they saw.”107 With respect to the emissaries of Maheśvara mentioned above, whatever their original identity, it is certain that in later periods, in India at least, Hanumān and Bhairava were regarded as emissaries of Śiva, identical to the eponymous Maheśvara.

Who were these children? Davis excerpts part of a Buddhist tantric text that records the possession of a boy by Ucchuṣma. In Sanskritic mythology Ucchuṣma, “the Crackler,” is an aspect of Agni. However, in esoteric Buddhism Ucchuṣma, glossed as “the Vajra-Being of Impure Traces,” commands a considerable host of spirit-soldiers. The possessed boy was called “Holy One” (daozhe) by the monk who wrote the text, either because he was considered to have dedicated himself to a religious life as a follower of “the Way” or because he was transparent to the divine, the “Venerable Spirit,”108 who may have been Ucchuṣma. The possession here is described vividly, but not paradigmatically. That the boy is said to have jumped and flung himself about, grabbed a sword, run out of the temple gate until he reached a pile of cow dung, struck the pile three times with his sword, then collapsed on the ground,109 leads Davis to conclude that in this episode:

we are far from the highly controlled, rarefied, and even claustrophobic atmosphere of the Buddhist āveśa rites, in which two or more virginal and purified children stood passively before the master amidst lighted incense and strewn flowers; in which the descent of the divinity and the onset of trance were distinguishable only by the most subtle of signs—the cessation of breathing, unblinking eyes, and a slight reddish tint around the pupils; and in which the children had in essence become living icons, as luminescent, but also as confined, as the pearl or crystal for which they were substitutes.110

The “basic structure of the Tang rituals of āvesa,” says Davis, consists of “the controlled possession of a boy by a cultic divinity and his subsequent clairvoyance.”111 The archive of āveśa material that Davis and Strickmann introduce demonstrates that possession ritual in Chinese religion, whether identified as tantric Buddhist, Daoist, Daoist-influenced esoteric Buddhist or vice versa, as well as rites of Daoist- and Buddhist-influenced independent spirit exorcists, changed radically during the Tang dynasty (618–907).112 This, it appears, was due to Indic (and Tibetan) influence. The general tenor of the change was that late- and post-Tang possession ritual was more extreme than that of the non-tantric ritual whose practitioners frequented the early Tang imperial court.

The vast majority of cases of possession described by Davis and Strickmann share the essential elements of the ritual of svasthāvesa found in the earlier tantric texts and the later South Indian manuscripts. Other Chinese aweishe and Japanese abisha materials that they cite support this ritual kinship. The most important common features of these rituals are the following: (1) the imposition of the spirit into the medium or into a compatible third party, which is, characteristically, a child, though the texts add that a divinity “could also be compelled to enter a reflective object or hollow icon,” such as a mirror;113 (2) mention of “matters past, present, and future,” which indicates an oracular function to the ritual; (3) the engagement of Maheśvara, which directly indicates a link, first, to the deities of the Indic ritual of svasthāvesa, which include Maheśvara and, second, to Bhairava and Hanumān, both aspects of Śiva, of whom Maheśvara is a multiform; and (4) the use of mantras and mudrās, which help induce the possession. Davis states: “The unity of practitioner and divinity is a defining feature of Esoteric Buddhism and a mark of the extent to which even Daoist therapeutic rituals had become ‘tantracized’ in the Song.”114 This is a feature not only of Esoteric Buddhism, but also of Indian Śaiva theology and practice.

To take this one step further, this is a feature not only of Himalayan Śaiva and Sakta practice, but of subcontinental Indian devotionalism (bhakti), a fact readily evident in both mid-first-millennium Tamil devotional poetry and approximately contemporaneous Sanskrit counterparts. It is generally agreed that Tamil devotionalism exerted critical influence on the Sanskrit texts, helping to establish both the fundamental patterns of devotional practice and the emotional or evocational parameters of the devotional constitution.115 This Sanskrit devotionalism subsequently influenced the Kashmiri Śaiva and Sākta practice and textuality, where elements of tantric urgency and severity, including worship of Mahāvidyās and other sanguinary goddesses,116 were compounded with this otherwise zealous devotionalism. This was then replicated in the devotional fervor characteristic of Esoteric Buddhism. In short, the devotional impulse (bhāva) expressed most decisively in the Vaiṣṇava literature of the subcontinent (e.g., the Bhāgavata Purāṇa) is heavily implicated in the development of Esoteric Buddhism, a link that has been insufficiently explored.117
