+++
title = "07 Svasthāveśa in South India"

+++
We must now briefly examine a few Sanskrit āveśa manuscripts found in the South Indian libraries. These manuscripts are quite ordinary in that they prescribe the construction of easily inscribed yantras or maṇḍalas that were likely in common use.118 Other normative features are the recitation of bija mantras found in nearly all mantra collections (though they have their own unique order here), and brief statements of purpose and fruits to be gained (saṇkalpa). Although they have a standard format and structure, these manuscripts have unique content, as shown by a composite summary.

The ritual of āveśa should be performed secretly, in the privacy of one’s house or, better, at an isolated Śiva temple. An officiant (māntrika)119 oversees the construction of one or sometimes two maṇḍalas inscribed on the ground with colored powder. The maṇḍalas are described in minute detail; indeed, these descriptions occupy the greater part of the manuscripts. They are oversized yantras, geometric representations of the deities for whom they are intended, in the present cases Hanumān and (Vaṭuka-) Bhairava.120 The latter is, in a manuscript titled “Āveśabhairavaṃ Śarabhakalpe,” identified with the sarabha, the ghastly eight-legged celestial beast brought into the realm of the gods by Śiva.121 After the maṇḍala is constructed, an eight-year-old boy with good qualities, who has bathed and is pure, is seated on it in lotus pose.122 Then the māntrika recites a hundred times the long and intricate mantras designed to bring about possession. After this, cooled, powdered, and scented ash (bhasma, vibhūti) from a havana (ritual fire) is applied to the boy’s forehead. The boy should then become possessed by Hanumān or Vaṭukabhairava as the māntrika calls out āvesaya āveśaya (let him become possessed, let him become possessed), after which the boy gains the ability to communicate knowledge of the past, present, and future, including auspicious or inauspicious fruit that may be reaped by the client in a future birth.123 The manuscripts do not state whether this information is given only upon questioning or whether the boy is understood to speak at the independent instigation of the deity. The possession is lifted after the ash has been applied twenty-one times, accompanied by another long mantra.

A partial model for the Hanumān āveśa understood in these manuscripts occurs in the Rāmāyaṇa. The manuscript called “Avesa Hanumantam”124 states that the boy becomes identified with Āñjaneya after mantras for Hanumān as the messenger of Rama (ramaduta) and Lakṣmaṇa are recited. The exorcist should utter the words āveśaya āveśaya ehi ehi praveśaya praveśaya (Possess! Possess! Come! Come! Enter! Enter!), followed by an exhortation to follow the example of the Rāmāyaṇa, “O Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, possess the violated palace in Laṅkā” (laṅkāprāsādabhañjanam). Hanumān is referred to here by the appellations Jagatprāṇatanūbhava (“Son of the Wind,” equivalent to Vāyuputra, a similar name in more common use) and Prāṇavāyusvarūpa (One Whose Form Is Vital Wind), both suggesting the qualities of pervasiveness, invasiveness, and penetration, as well as, more subtly, indicating the importance of prāṇa in “tantric” yogic practice. Hanumān is also one of the two archetypal devotees in Hinduism, the other being Prahlāda, the son of the demon king Hiraṇykaśipu, who maintained his devotion to Viṣṇu against all odds and successfully invoked him to appear personally and defeat his own father. This he did in the form of Narasiṃha, Viṣṇu’s Man-Lion avatara, emerging from a pillar to eviscerate Hiraṇyakaśipu. It is no accident that the healing and exorcism center at Bālājī, in Rajasthan, is a Hanumān temple pilgrimage site and that Prahlāda is also represented there as a deity, which in my experience is unique. Thus, it is consistent with recognized practice that notions of ethereality, devotion, incarnation, and violence, all attendant during possession, are brought out in these manuscripts.
