+++
title = "09 The Tantrarāja"

+++
The term svasthāvesa is attested in the sixteenth-century tantric compendium Tantrarāja (TR), brought to public notice by Sir John Woodroffe in 1918.132 This text presents a fairly close, if highly condensed, depiction of at least some of the material found in the early tantric materials and the South Indian manuscripts. The TR describes two yantras of the goddess and a ritual (TR 9.61–101), the most important part of which is the act of situating on one of the yantras a young girl who is to be guided into and out of svasthāveśa. The text speaks of the “performance” of svasthāveśa, an admission that should not be overlooked. The relevant verses state, “one should perform svasthāveśa” (9.76–78) on the first of the two yantras, because it is over this that the officiant recites the relevant possession mantras. The girl should then become identified with the deity, after which the officiant should burn a kind of incense called sarjjarasa. When she enters into the possession, the girl is worshipped reverently and with appropriate ceremony. Afterward, the client should ask for whichever objects are desired, upon which the girl will always reply fittingly. After being worshipped suitably, the deity becomes her, and after rites, such as sprinkling water, are performed on the first yantra the officiant causes the girls to disembark from their condition in which they are controlled by others.133 The Tantrarāja does not specify who these “others” are, and the commentary states, rather aimlessly, “piśāca, etc.,” apparently to qualify his previous assertion that it is a devatā.

The TR does not in itself shed any light on the South Indian manuscripts. No mantras are given, nor are deities named, whether Hanumān, Bhairava, or a goddess. Moreover, the commentator, Subhagānandanātha, reacts to this rite with an unfamiliarity reminiscent of Bhaṭṭotpala’s in his comments on Varāhamihira’s reference to prasenā in the Bṛhatsaṃhitā, which is to say that he responds as a tantric paṇḍit rather than a tantric ritualist. In any case, this reference is noteworthy by its very presence. It demonstrates that the term svasthāvesa was current, at least in some tantric circles, in the sixteenth century, a period that approximates the composition of the South Indian manuscripts (though the latter could be a century or two later).
