+++
title = "10 Indian Āveśa and Chinese Aweishe: A Comparison"

+++
To complete the comparative aspect of this topic, an examination of svasthāveśa not only as a term for nonpathological possession but, more specifically, as oracular possession of children, we must offer more examples of this phenomenon in Chinese literature. Only then can the extent to which the Chinese material is derivative of the Indian be determined.

Some compilations of Tang dynasty stories tell of children possessed by the spirits (shen) of learned men. Glen Dudbridge explicates several such accounts from a genre called zhiguai ( tales of the marvelous), one exemplar of which is the eighth-century Guangyi ji ( The Book of Marvels). In Dudbridge’s first story, a girl named Wang Fazhi from the town of Tonglu serves the spirit of a young man called Teng Quanyin, with whom she had an affinity in a previous birth; she begins to experience regular possession of his spirit before the age of five. In frequent meetings with the county magistrate, writers and poets, and Buddhist monks, Quanyin, speaking through Fazhi, demonstrates his literary, scholarly, and religious erudition, composing poetry extemporaneously.134

If the story is to gain any credibility, it must be assumed that the girl was subjected to ritually induced possession. Even if the story is to be treated as a member of another genre—for example, didactic tales, fiction, folklore, or an intermediate genre—we must still ask how, even in the imagination, a five-year-old girl is able to “serve the spirit of a young man.” My sense is that this “service” must have been ritual, and ritually induced, under the supervision of a learned master in this art. Even if the story is regarded as pure fiction, this element of cultural background must be assumed. This inference is based on the presence of frequent descriptions (and tales) of oracular possession weighted toward either their narrative or ritual components, when, in fact, in any “real” or “imagined” event, both are assumed to be equally present.135 In the case at hand, the description of the ritual must have been suppressed in favor of the narrative. As in the Mantramahodadhi, this story does not state or imply that the erudition revealed during possession was maintained by the girl outside the mediumistic act. This too argues for ritually induced possession. Oracular possession is rarely reported as a spontaneous experience; it nearly always adheres to known, effective, and ritually adumbrated models, as mentioned several times earlier. It is, as noted elsewhere, publicly performed, even if that public is very small. In general, it requires an expectant and knowing audience.

Strickmann, in Chinese Magical Medicine, relates an aweishe tale in which the Chinese emperor’s twenty-fifth daughter was at the point of death. The tantric master Vajrabodhi attempted to intercede by sending the souls of two seven-year-old girls from the palace as emissaries to Yama, in a bid to save her. The strategy was to coerce them to deliver to Yama an edict that was written for this purpose but was then ritually burned while Vajrabodhi recited an incantation over it. As a result of this ritual, the girls, whose faces Vajrabodhi wrapped in red silk, after which they lay on the ground, were able to recite the edict perfectly. “Vajrabodhi then entered into samādhi. With inconceivable force he sent the girls to King Yama with the edict.” King Yama relented, but only briefly. He sent the soul of the princess back with the girls, but after half a day she died. In that brief period, she delivered a message to the emperor: “It is very hard to alter destiny as fixed in the other world. King Yama has sent me back to see you only for a short while.”136

As in the previous story, the aweishe ritual is implied more than it is stated. Here at least we are told some of the outline of the ritual: the girls’ heads are wrapped in red silk, they are laid on the ground, an edict is written and burned, Vajrabodhi recites an incantation, he then enters samādhi. This is not prescriptive literature, however, and the narrative element dominates: the spirits of the girls travel to Yama’s world with the burnt essence of the edict and deliver it to Yama.137 The latter, no doubt out of deference to the emperor (as well as to Vajrabodhi), sends the princess’s spirit back with the two girls. In the end, though, it is a temporary measure; once dead, the princess cannot remain alive in the human world for more than an additional half a day. In this story the aweishe empowered the girls to engage in shamanic travel. Patently, this aweishe does not match the primary deployment of āveśa in Sanskrit, where it most often indicates deity or spirit possession instigated by the person being possessed.

In what ways, however, does this differ? It is definitely aweishe, because it is labeled as such in the text. It is also clearly oracular. In addition, the description of the girls in aweishe is reminiscent of that found in tantric texts. They collapse on the ground in a trance as a result of what is, by any other name, ritual initiation, or at least ritual inducement.138 The observed symptoms are consistent with possession. This is, it appears, sufficient to confer upon it the label aweishe. The text does not identify, or even suggest, a possessing entity; yet, for it to be aweishe, the assumption of one must have been present. This suggests a gray area in indigenous identification of possession: Sometimes, for the sake of clarity, we want possession to conform to its simplest notion. But this is not always the case in India or China, where an experience is labeled āveśa or aweishe according to its intensity, rather than to other criteria, such as elision of personality. The girls, young as they are, have had a powerful experience of physical collapse, induced by the weaving of hypnotic spells by a ritual master, with an incumbent interpretation that the spells attract a deity who then possesses the girls and carries the message inscribed on the burned edict to Yama. There is no indication, however, that their personalities have shifted to those of others. We are, then, bound by the word of the text, which calls this aweishe, even if it is not explicit how exactly the spirits or the possession manifest.

Strickmann also notes the use of the word āveśa when exploring the link between dream and divination among children. Although both dream and memory are regarded as unreliable for establishing philosophical truth, because they are regarded as fragmentary, they are to a great extent rehabilitated in religious and historical narrative.139 In Mantras et Mandarins, Strickmann discusses the nexus of dream, divination, and possession, showing their convergence within the realm of Tantra.140 This is an attractive association, and Strickmann works it into a discussion of a ritual performed on children that produces initiatory dreams. In this ritual a mantra is recited 108 times, a mudrā is formed with the fingers, the child falls into a kind of sleep or reverie, possession descends (it is here that Strickmann uses the word āvesa), and the child then will relate matters good and bad.141 Much of this, it appears, is derived from rites of svasthāvesa. Most pertinent for our purposes is the point that all three—dream, divination, and possession—are regarded as authoritative when emanating from children.

This introduces the possibility that any kind of oracular divination, with even the slightest hint of possession, could qualify as āvesa. If so, would this dilute the entire category and render it nearly meaningless? My answer is no, it would not. In the final analysis, the oracular experiences under discussion were āvesa, conceptually even svasthāvesa. This would still be the case even if these experiences lacked the characteristic behavioral shifts accompanied by specifically identified possessing entities. As these texts demonstrate, oracular divinatory practice, especially when enacted through other media, most notably children, is a central feature of healthy (svasthatā), nonpathological possession (āvesa). Indeed, this alone would qualify the practice as svasthāvesa, even if other practices might also qualify.

These stories are sufficient to demonstrate the similarities found in the Indian and Chinese practices of divinatory possession. The evidence is conclusive that much, though by no means all, of the similarity is due to influence from the India and possibly Tibet. The presence of Indian terms and names, from āvesa/aweishe to Mahādeva, render it certain that both the Indian tantric textuality and the transmission of esoteric Buddhist narrative substantially influenced the Chinese practices in question, at least to the extent that their texts reveal these practices (though it is possible that, like Indian texts, the Chinese texts provide us with a normative, sanitized version of them). The results of oracular possession as a primary component in divinatory practice—knowledge of the past, present, and future, displays of miraculous learning, healing secrets and other prognosticatory or revealed knowledge—are attested in many cultures; they are not limited to areas of Sino-Indian cultural contact. With respect to these regions, however, sporadic examples of such oracular or divinatory possession are quite ancient, as we have seen. Recall, for example, the tales of Bhujyu Lāhyāyani in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad that exhibit important resonances with the material discussed here, though they do not contain the same degree of certainty with respect to retrievable knowledge as asserted in either the Chinese stories or the MM.

Despite these relatively parallel attestations, it nevertheless appears that the Chinese ritual texts address therapeutic or exorcistic practice to a greater degree, and with more subtle distinctions and nuances, than does the Indic material. For example, Davis writes of this practice in China: “The style of these exorcisms appears to reflect many things at once—the late Tang rituals of āveśa, the Daoist rites of kaozhao [kaozhao fa, “Rite of Summoning for Investigation”], and especially the characteristic practices of village spirit-mediums in the Song.”142 The Indic texts domesticate and Sanskritize practices that appear to be derived from village spirit-mediums, women, or others of lower social rank. The problem with the Indian material, to state the obvious, is that the textuality, particularly in Sanskrit, reflects the interests of the literate brahmanical and ruling classes, whereas in China, at least during the Song (960–1279) and Ming (1368–1644) dynasties, the textuality was more likely to include direct accounts and interests of a greater range of social classes. We know, for example, from modern ethnographic accounts in India (including my own observations) that a strong and widespread tradition of therapeutic possession exists that is startlingly similar to the “Rite of Summoning for Investigation,” though I have no evidence that the Chinese practice influenced the Indian one or vice versa. In India, this practice is found largely among non-brahman communities that are underrepresented in Sanskrit accounts of exorcistic practice.143 In spite of these sociological and anthropological resonances, the Chinese and Indian practices appear at present to be wholly independent developments.
