+++
title = "11 Conclusions"

+++
In lieu of decisive conclusions on this vast material, I instead pose a question: Why was possession induced in prepubescent youths? I cannot produce a confident reply; the answers lie in addressing both the nature of childhood and its various Indian and Chinese cultural constructions; in other words, both nature and culture. My initial impulse is to tread lightly on questions of culturally constituted psychology and the applicability of psychoanalytic theory, an impulse that should be evident from my earlier methodological explorations. I believe that, in spite of the efforts of Kakar and others, these areas have been insufficiently explored and I am particularly unqualified to offer a mature opinion on them.

Answers to this question, as to so many others, risk being naively obvious or incomprehensibly complex. My first answer is that youths may have been used because they were regarded as pure, as embodiments of moral neutrality, and because youth itself was regarded as a natural restorative. The single scrap of supporting evidence for this is found in Kalkin Puṇḍarīka’s Vimalaprabhā on the Laghukālacakratantra, which specifies that a virgin’s (kumārikā) success in this ritual, which enables her to predict events of the past, present, and future based on visions seen in an oracular mirror (pratisenādarśe), is due only in part to the grace of the guru or presiding ācārya. Equally important is the fact that she has not yet experienced sexual union. Puṇḍarīka rejects the view that it is the acarya’s grace (ācāryaprasādaḥ) alone that causes the virgin to be empowered by the deity of the mantra. He suggests, instead, that if the ācārya has the ability to empower the girl, he ought to be able to empower himself as well, thus gaining the ability to answer questions as an oracle. But this does not occur, notes Puṇḍarīka: The ācārya is not able to generate the visions that produce in himself oracular skill. In fact, says Puṇḍarīka, the empowerment is only effective in a virgin who “has not experienced the pleasure of ejaculation that comes about through the friction of the two [sex] organs [dvīndriya].”144 Pressing this further, one can say that this explanation could also be associated with notions of undiluted and unambiguous sexual and gender identity, which would become too complicated to withstand the temptations of this divination after sexual maturity and activity have been achieved.

A further indication of the vulnerability of children to possession may be seen in the evidence amassed in Chapter 12, as well as in Chapter 6, to possession of children, even fetuses, by destructive spirits called “childsnatchers” (bālagraha). It is surely the purity, innocence, and emotional unguardedness of children that was believed to make them easy targets for such spirits. It is likely that these same qualities made them attractive to ritualists who administered induced childhood possession. This, however, differed from possession by bālagrahas in that it was “positive” or oracular rather than “negative” or disease-producing and was characterized by the guided and protective presence of the experienced ritualist.

A second suggestion is that the mantrin must be only that; he can officiate, but he has neither the innate ability nor the extrinsic eligibility to perform the possession. It is essential that he immerse himself fully in his officiating duties and that, conversely, he not open himself up to the risk of losing control of the ritual process. Such a loss of control or power would implicate him in loss of control not only over the boy or girl in possession but also over the forces of destiny that are being exposed and manipulated under his priestly control. This is a matter of masculine brahmanical power, of control over personality and identity where complete eclipse or transcendence of self and person is an accepted fact of successful possession. Although answers to certain questions (praśna, pasiṇa, prasena, etc.) might be sought by anyone in a crystal ball as it were, for example, in water, a mirror, or an oil-smeared thumb, a person in an inferior social and intellectual position was preferred because he or she could articulate divinatory or oracular answers under the watchful and practiced eye of the mantrin, who would, according to the conventions of hierarchy, retain the right to censor or reinterpret the words of the oracle if they were to appear immature, wild, or irresponsible.

Svasthāvesa is still performed in India, though the only example of it that I have seen was at the Bylakuppe refugee colony near Mysore by an elderly Tibetan woman, who is highly regarded in the community and uses an “oracular mirror.” The woman, called Ama Ta Bap (Plate 9), a name indicating that she divines by plucking a hair and “reading” it (though I observed no cases in which she used a hair), lives in a small house in a remote corner of this 35,000-acre colony, far from the Gelugpa and Nyingmapa monasteries that dominate the Bylakuppe landscape. Central to her practice is a shiny brass surface with an abstract pattern lightly etched on it into which she stares, which serves as the backdrop of her puja altar. The client sits on a chair in front of her and off to her right as she sits cross-legged on an elevated cushion before her altar. After she hears and acknowledges the question, she makes a few offerings with rice, water, and other items, stares into the brass plating, and answers the questions. In my experience her answers are vividly descriptive of visions she has just experienced. This, of course, does not in itself imply possession, and she did not provide me with that level of detail. Although the nexus of possession and reported visionary experience is well attested, it is also sometimes denied.145 I cannot, therefore, say with certainty that Ama Ta Bap believed that she was possessed or that the question arose for her clients; I can say only that the setting and proceedings resemble classical accounts in which possession is a possibility.146

The likelihood that her oracular trances are the result of possession, however, is increased by Diemberger’s ethnographies of female oracles in Tibet. The usual practice among Tibetan oracles is to undergo an initiation or empowerment in which certain “energy-channels” (rtsa) are opened. This psychic opening permits the individual to become possessed by any number of minor deities or spirits. Diemberger writes,

The popular perception is that impurities in the energy-channel are responsible for aberrant behaviour. Once these are ritually purified, possession is considered to be under control and confers upon the oracle an extraordinary competence in helping the other living beings.147

With the deity or spirit in control, the oracle then resorts to mirror divination, which “allows the gods to express themselves, with the oracle acting as an intermediary who can also provide the relevant explanation while in a lucid state.”148

I have heard reliable reports that a few monks in this Tibetan colony perform similar divination, confirming it as a respected practice among diaspora Tibetans. The textual evidence noted herein similarly confirms that it was practiced in India in the past. Much of this history is encapsulated in a Mughal-era painting (Plate 10), a late sixteenth-century projection of the use of an oracular mirror by Alexander the Great. The painting, dating to the year 1597 and ascribed to a Hindu artist named Dharmadāsa in the court of Akbar, was a visual interpretation of part of a long Persian poem by Amir Khusraw of Delhi, called “Ā’Īnah-i Sikandarī” (Mirror of Alexander), composed in the year 1299.149 What is remarkable for our purposes is that this painting by a Hindu in a late sixteenth-century Muslim court, an interpretation of a Persian poem of three centuries earlier, portrays the use of an oracular mirror by a legendary Greek conqueror of fifteen centuries earlier. In this way, the life of magical or oracular mirrors is stretched seamlessly through thousands of years and numerous cultural, religious, and political boundaries, without apparent discrimination.150

A few additional examples should shed a bit of light on a few variants of the practice of childhood possession, if not exactly on its diffusion. One is the divinatory process employed to discover a tulku (sprul-sku) or reincarnation of certain recently deceased lamas. This process often has been described and needs no recounting here,151 but Orofino writes that the “pra divination has been, over the centuries, one of the arts used to foresee the place where the Dalai Lamas would be born.”152 In Taiwan, child mediums, who are required to be illiterate, may still be found. They are called jitong (divination lad), a term that implies that they are both male and young. However, some jitong are older, and others are girls. A practice that appears to have evolved from this is still observed. Certain adult mediums in Taiwan wear bibs designed for children in their oracular practice. This appears to be commemorial, a relic from earlier times when children acted as mediums.153 This mild attempt at disguise or impersonation was probably intended both to incite the medium to assume a childlike state and to inspire the local deity to possess the medium. An explanation for the use of children as mediums in China, which conforms with the likely intent of this practice, is that their hun (soul) is less stable and therefore more displaceable.154 This notion is not found in South Asia, though it may be implied by the very fact of the use of child mediums. That said, however, we must enquire still further into the texts. Unfortunately, I have found no Indic text that addresses child mediumship or reflects on it in this manner. As expected, the texts are an amalgam of myth and prescription, mostly the latter. Much of the prescriptive aspect, as also should be expected, implicates paradigmatic figures. Perhaps primary among these is Hanumān, a widely invoked exemplar, who, we have seen, is the archetypal devotee and “Son of the Wind,” a name that evokes his ethereal ancestry. He is also celebrated for his strength; he is the patron deity of wrestlers.155 This is not unimportant, because strength is a natural attribute and symbol for victory—and possession is always an ordeal of sorts, in both its performance and its aspirations. Furthermore, Hanumān is forever youthful. His personality is opposite that of other monkeys: He is celibate and therefore retains one of the characteristics of youth. He is also the embodiment of devotion, a requisite of the teacher-disciple relationship that is close to the heart of svasthāvesa, as it is to the power of spirit healing at Bālājī. His youth, strength, and virility, channeled into his master’s service, render him the embodiment of truthfulness and dharma. Thus, he is characterized as a dharmic and therefore (marginally) Sanskritic, an exemplar for those who require such a figure to legitimize their possession practices.


PLATE 9. Ama Ta Bap–Bylekuppe, Karnataka.  
Photo by the author, 2002.

PLATE 10. Alexander erects an enchanted mirror that allows him to monitor activity on the high seas.  
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

There is no question that children are held in high regard in India, as potential bearers of crucial esoteric knowledge.156 In both South and East Asia, it appears that their supposedly natural talents for innocence and purity, as well as an apparent moral neutrality that distinguishes them from adults, rendered them more trustworthy in delivering unbiased answers to questions of weighty and biased human (which is to say, adult) concerns. This was even more important when considering the ambivalent position of the mantrin. On this ambivalence, I note Stanley Tambiah’s observation of Thai Buddhist exorcists as “both a caricature and an inversion of the orthodox Buddhist monk. He uses Buddhist sacred words for purposes diametrically opposed to those of the monk; the latter chants sacred words in order to teach morality and to transfer merit and blessings, whereas the exorcist uses the sacred words to frighten spirits and drive them away.”157 The mantrin (Mandarin) or māntrika in tantric ritual was similarly afflicted: He was often an adept, but not always trusted or regarded as a moral exemplar by the general public, even by his own clientele. He therefore had to turn to his opposite to bring about the goals of tantric divinatory ritual.

In conclusion, we have seen here wide-ranging data demonstrating that the practice of svasthāvesa, regardless of whether the practice was identified by that name, had a broad distribution in South and East Asia. It appears to have begun in northern India among tāntrikas (whether or not identified by that name) affiliated with Buddhist, Hindu, or even Jain lineages, who adapted and textualized practices that predated them (cf. the citation from Susruta). It then spread into Tibet and China through transmission of tantric lineages beginning in the seventh century. It is impossible, in general, to know for certain how the geographic distribution of a particular practice coincides with the distribution of its textuality, especially if that textuality is sporadic, geographically widespread, and stretched over more than a millennium. This is especially the case where literacy is low and popular practices are legitimated (in this case, through Sanskritization) on an ad hoc basis, and where the practice in question has all the earmarks of a nonexclusive, non-brahmanical production. What first surfaced in north India in the fifth to seventh centuries as a variety of praśna or pasiṇa became prasenā farther north and east a few centuries later. Then it appeared half a millennium later in tantric texts and an assortment of prayogas in South India that strikingly resemble the Chinese texts. The description of the ritual, or at least clear references to it, most prominently its use of children in oracular possession, found its way at various points into Indian and Chinese narrative literature (cf. Kathāsaritsāgara and Guangyi zhi). It is a very colorful history and one that raises significant question about notions of personal agency and epistemology, the nature of childhood in India and China, and the transmission of ideas, practices, and textuality across lineage, class, and geographic boundaries.
