+++
title = "12 NOTES"

+++
1. I am particular grateful to Alexis Sanderson, who brought the unpublished Śaiva texts to my attention, shared with me his copious transcriptions and notes on them, and eventually went through a draft of this chapter, offering many positive suggestions, some of which are worthy of specific attribution. I am also indebted to E. Muralidhara Rao and H. V. Nagaraja Rao for help in transcribing a number of Sanskrit manuscripts from Telugu script into Nāgarī; to the participants of a conference on Tantra and Daoism held at Boston University in April 2002, especially John Lagerwey, David Germano, and Ronald Davidson; and to Wendi Adamek for explicating the Chinese and patiently answering many questions that must have seemed basic to her.
2. Subhagānandanātha’s commentary, called Manoramā, on the Tantrarāja Tantra 9.76, where he glosses svasthāveśaḥ as svasthasya devatāvesanam.
3. Suspect because it is limited neither to Kashmir nor to the worship of Śiva. Even in its most generous specifications, the term “Kashmir Saivism” could never include the works we consider here. “Kashmir Saivism,” instead, includes texts of the Trika, Krama, or Bhairava traditions. On the place of each of them in Śaiva sects and lineages, see Sanderson 1988. See also p. 406 n. 2.
4. Sanderson has exploited one or more of these texts in virtually all his published work. The manuscripts that Sanderson used, parts of which he has shared with me, are the following: Jayadrathayāmala National Archives, Kathmandu (NAK) 5–4650; Nisvasaguhya, NAK 1–277; Tantrasadbhāva, NAK 5–1985, and the Nepal-German Manuscript Preservation Project (NGMPP) A188/22; Bṛhatkālottara, NAK 1–273. In Sanderson’s estimation, the provenance of the two Buddhist texts among them, the Cakrasaṃvarapiṇḍārtha and the Sekoddesa, is probably eastern India.
5. The Tibetan translation appears in full, while only the first chapter of the Sanskrit text has been thus far edited; cf. Orofino 1994b.
6. Sanderson has been utilizing manuscripts of these texts in his scholarship for two decades; see, e.g., 1986, 2001.
7. Davis 2001; Strickmann 2002.
8. The NCC is not yet complete. Eleven volumes have been published to date, and it appears to be about half completed. Thus, more relevant manuscripts may yet be located. However, I have also checked the more likely catalogues from which the NCC is drawn and have come up empty.
9. Rajagopalachar 1990:1:50–53, catalogue numbers 48062–48069. Extracts from three of these appear in the appendix (which has separate pagination), pp. 57–59. #48063 (4868/22), in Telugu script, describes possession of Avesabhairava (asya śrī āveśābhairava mahāmantrasya agastya ṛṣiḥ). It states, however, that the devatā of the ritual is named Svasthāveśabhairavaḥ (Bhairava [viz. Vīrabhadra] who induces svasthāvesa). #48067 (10024/12), one of the brief palm leaf Nagari manuscripts, appears to be no more than mantras, as the title indicates (Āveśamantraḥ). I have examined #48062 (548/7) and #48069 (548/3), both in Telugu script. Although these differ significantly from the Chennai manuscripts, and probably come from different (though related) lineages, they do not add much to our knowledge of the procedures for svasthāvesa. However, #48067 (10024/12) has an unusually complete colophon: iti śrī āgamarahasye atharvaṇatantrakhaṇḍe umāmaheśvarasaṃvāde āveśamantrayantrapūjādividhir nāma prathamaḥ paṭalaḥ | (Thus ends the first paṭala called “Instructions on mantra, yantra, and puja to bring about possession,” appearing in a discussion between Umā and Maheśvara in the section on the Tantra of the Atharvaṇas in the illustrious Āgamarahasya). However, I do not find this in the published edition of the Agamarahasya (see Chapter 10, n. 5). This title, meaning “Secret of the Sacred Doctrine,” could well be generic; thus, more than one text of this name could exist in manuscript.
10. On the range and local production of such ephemera, see Diehl 1956:42–65; equally important on the origins, history, contents, production, and distribution of chapbooks is Hanaway and Nasir 1996.
11. The term dakṣiṇācāra is to be distinguished from the directional āmnaya transmission known as the dakṣiṇāmnāya. See Sanderson’s guide to medieval Śaiva lineages, 1988:681–690ff., for a description of the directional āmnāya transmissions. For a discussion of Sākta Tantrism under the influence of the Śaṇkarācāryas, see Brooks 1992:43ff.; also Kavirāj 1963. For an account of Srividyā practice, see Khanna 1986.
12. On the proximity of the Sanskrit vedic ritual traditions and both brahmanical and nonbrahmanical possession in Andhra Pradesh, see the various articles by Knipe, esp. 2004, which compares the two traditions.
13. ORI ms. #548 (see accession numbers 48062, 48069).
14. This manuscript appears to be only about 150 years old, but is in very poor condition, crumbling to dust upon mere touch. I am not familiar with the Dakṣiṇakālikāgama or the Vetālatantra.
15. Rajagopalachar 1990: 2:276–277.
16. I have not yet examined the manuscripts at the latter two institutions.
17. Cf. Poleman 1938:#4658, 14 ff. 9.5 x 4.1. 12–13 lines; University of Pennsylvania manuscript #578.
18. As modern (rather than nineteenth-century) Sanskritists, we are hesitant to comment too negatively on the language and diction of our materials. Thus it is striking (and encouraging) to see Sanderson refer to a text written in “barbarous Sanskrit” (referring to the Yonigahvara); cf. 2001:15n14.
19. iti sudarśanasaṃhitāyām uttarakhaṇḍe śrīkārttavīryārjunadīpakalpakathanaṃ nāma dvādaśapaṭalaḥ I am in the process of preparing an edition of this text, which appears to deal primarily with corasāstra, the art of thievery, as the presence of the semidivine character Kārtavīryārjuna might indicate. One text of this peculiar sastra, called Śaṇmukhakalpa, was edited by George (1991), published in 1966 and revised twenty-five years later.
20. A quick perusal of the Sudarśamasaṃhitā manuscripts in Mysore reveals that most of it consists of rituals (vidhāna) for Hanumān.
21. Ms. #51670. The colophon reads: iti śrīsudarśanasaṃhitāyāṃ hanumaddīpavidhir nāma viṃśatiḥ paṭalaḥ. The section dealing directly with possession of Hanumān, which we address below, is the third paṭala, called Āñjaneyāveśavidhiḥ.
22. Manuscript number D 7763: iti śrīsudarśanasaṃhitāyām ānjaneya āveśavidhir nāma tṛtīyo paṭalaḥ || (Āñjaneya is another name of Hanumān).
23. Thanks for this information are due to Philip Lutgendorf, who sees Hanumān as occasionally shamanic. Cf. Lutgendorf 1991:48 on Hanumān’s “crude strength and occasional destructiveness,” attributes which are sometimes invoked in possession. The pañcamukhī Hanumān has Hanumān in the center, flanked on its four sides by Narasiṃha, Varāha, Garuḍa, and Hayagrīva; cf. Lutgendorf 1994. Although this is Vaiṣṇava imagery, Hanumān has also been associated with Śiva since antiquity, as one of the eleven Rudras. I have seen many large and very recent images of this form of Hanumān in Andhra Pradesh, where we also find a good deal of possession of Hanumān.
24. We investigate this in Chapter 12. It is sufficient for now to note that one of the most prominent appearances of this is Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati" 41–44. The character of these chapters as mantravidhana is unquestioned. Tantric healing practices derivative from the ISP survive in Kerala, though in Malayalam medium rather than Sanskrit, in both the aṣṭavaidya tradition of the Nambudiris and other less brahman-dominated Ayurvedic traditions. On the former, still insufficiently researched, see Zimmermann 1987:213.
25. Cf. Bahulkar 1994, Bhat 1987, and Caland 1908.
26. His monumental Bṛhatsaṃhitā served as the basis for all later works on the subject. After the Atharvaveda, the medical literature, where we might expect to find systematic accounts of omens and portents, turns self-consciously scientific and rational; see Roçu 1986. On the dating of Varāhamihīra, see Pingree 1994:570.
27. Especially in the semantics of samāveśa; see Chapter 10.
28. Sanderson 1985 also speaks of this, though rather differently.
29. See the discussions above on the MBh and the Bhagavadajjukā.
30. The voluntary or involuntary status of possession during public or semipublic ritual is often problematic. Participants in festival possession often report that their possession is spontaneous and involuntary. In these situations, however, it is almost always learned, suggested, and socially advantageous. For one such report, see Neff 1995:194 ff.
31. See Chapter 4, which discusses words and terms used for negative possession in Sanskrit and different regional languages.
32. On the antiquity of cultural traffic across the Himalayas, dating to the third millennium B.C.E., see Xu 1991. Xu’s research is archaeological and focuses on Karuo, near Qamdo on the eastern edge of the Tibetan plateau. The physical evidence reveals considerable cultural affinity between Burzahom in the Kashmir valley and Karuo. Xu speculates on routes across Tibet by tracking the evidence from Neolithic cultures of the period. See also Samuel 2000. While Samuel is not able to comfortably posit “significant influence from the Indus Valley cultural tradition” (p. 653) into Tibet from the mid-third to mid-second millennium B.C.E., he points out enough evidence for early contact “to suggest that the Indus Valley should be taken seriously as a possible source for early Tibetan cultures, and that its neglect in the literature so far is unjustified” (p. 666). He speculates that perhaps “a reflection of the Indus Valley civilization” may be found “in the accounts of the semi-mythical Bonpo homeland ’Ol-mo lung-ring, the place of the original teacher of Bon, ston-pa gShen-rab” (ibid.); cf. Martin 1995.
33. This includes Sanskrit-English, Sanskrit-French, Sanskrit-German, Sanskrit-Hindi, and Sanskrit-Sanskrit.
34. This curious lacuna includes the massive scriptorium of the Deccan College Sanskrit dictionary project, which, like the other lexicons, lists it only as the name of various royal personages. This should reflect not on the choice of texts selected for use in compiling this dictionary but on the difficulties incumbent on any attempt to compile a complete Sanskrit lexicon. The earliest reference to this name is in the Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā (3.1.9) and appears often in the Harivaṃśa, sporadically in the earlier Purāṇas, and once in the Jaina Mahāpurāṇa of the ninth century (3.150). The best known of these, however, is Prasenajit [Conqueror of Prasena], a king of Srāvasti (in the northeastern part of present-day Uttar Pradesh) in the time of the Buddha, who was converted to Buddhism by his wife, Mallikā; cf. Hirakawa 1990:33.
35. E-mail communication, September 13, 2001.
36. darpaṇa ādi meṃ devatā kā āhvān, mantravidyāviśeṣ |
37. The PSM also cites the compound pasiṇavijjā, viz. Skt. praśnavidyā, from the same texts. I am unable to find these terms in the texts; thus, it is likely that they are from the commentaries. The commentary on the Āyaraṇgasutta was written by Śīlāṇka in 876, a date that is more consistent with the remainder of the evidence. It is important that, among the sixty-four baneful vidyas listed in Sūtrakṛtāṇga Sūtra 2.2.13(26–27), a text that probably predates almost entirely the period that concerns us here, does not list pasiṇa, etc. See Jacob 1895:xl for cautionary words on dating this text, and 366f. for a translation of this passage. It may be mentioned here that the Sanskrit word vyantara, a general term for all manner of spirit-beings, is also attested much more in Jaina than in brahmanical texts.
38. Cf. Jain 1999:8; more detailed is Sen 1975:6–9.
39. Cf. Sen 1975:317. This is also mentioned by Jain 1984:264–65. See also Nandi 1994:395 and passim for an account of a detailed Jain tantric text called Jvālinī Kalpa. This text remains unpublished, and exists in only one manuscript housed in the Jaina Siddhanta Bhavan Library, in Arrah, Bihar. I have not examined it.
40. mantravidyā ke bal se svapan ādi meṃ devatā he āhvān dvārā jānā huā subhāsubh phal kā kathan |
41. Niśītha Cūrṇi 3, p. 383: suviṇayavijja kahiyaṃ kathiṃtassa pasiṇāpasiṇaṃ bhavati; cf. Sen 1975:317.
42. Bṛhatsaṃhitā (BṛS) 2.5, which reads in part: tātkālikapraśnaśubhāśubhanimittāni, predicting “good and bad omens upon timely inquiry.” This section of BṛS addresses the qualities required of an astrologer, much of which concerns the ability to answer questions. I refer here to the 1895 edition of the BṛS, ed. by Sudhākara Dvivedī. Other works attributed to Varāhamihira whose titles suggest a prior history of this term are the Prasnamahodadhi and Prasnacandrikā. These, however, are lost. BṛS 50.6 gives the best direction and time for prasna. Thus, it is likely that the astrological art of prasna was known to Varāhamihira.
43. I have encountered no instances of the Sanskrit prasna/prasnā in this sense.
44. kuhakāveśapihitaiḥ karṇopaśrutihetubhiḥ | kṛtādeśo na sarvatra praṣṭavyo na sa daivavit ||
45. This is something of a reversal, as āveśa is usually interpreted as a deity entering the body of the sādhaka or practitioner. Utpala, it appears, had little knowledge of these practices.
46. The Vidhānamālā, p. 26, defines karṇagraha and prescribes a brief exorcism. One who hears the voice of a relative, one’s guru or guru’s wife, or hissing sounds (ciṭciṭākāram) is possessed by a karṇagraha (taṃ karṇagraho gṛhṇāti). The exorcism is quite simple. Both pure offerings of fruit, flowers, sesame seed paste, etc., and impure offerings consisting of the five, liquor, meat, etc., are offered as bali at a crossroad at dawn, and a simple petitionary mantra is recited: gṛhāṇemaṃ baliṃ deva karṇāriṣṭakara graha | āturasya sukhaṃ siddhiṃ prayaccha tvaṃ mahābala ||. See the Madamamahārṇava section in Chapter 12 for more on this kind of exorcism.
47. See Kalkin Puṇḍarīka on Laghukālacakratantra, vol. 3, p. 89, that a karṇapiśācikā can relate knowledge gained in astrology and other mathematically based divination. I have heard certain tāntrikas in present-day India employ the term karṇapiśāca in this same sense.
48. On Bhaṭṭotpala and his works, see Bhat 1981:1:xxxvi–xlv; also Shastri 1962, who argues that Bhaṭṭotpala completed his commentary in 830 C.E. Bhat argues for a much later date, 966 C.E. Although Bhat knows the Vivṛti well, he does not follow it in many instances where he should. In addition, Bhat never states which edition of the Sanskrit text he is following; indeed, he gives no critical apparatus whatsoever. Thus, for example, in his translation our present verse is numbered 2.33, without explanation.
49. Strickmann incorrectly cites the use of the word prasena by attributing it to Utpala’s tenth-century commentary on Varāhamihira’s Bṛhajjātaka. In fact, it does not occur in this text, which is dedicated to the formalities of predictive astrology. Strickmann cites Böhtlingk’s 1879 revisions and additions to the earlier St. Petersburg lexicon of Böhtlingk and Roth (1855–1875) (Böhtlingk has the citation right), which glosses Utpala’s meaning as “eine Art Gauklerei.” Strickmann adds, “c’est–à-dire une sorte de prestidigitation, d’illusionisme, de charlatanisme” (1996:226). Strickmann’s error reappears in his posthumously published Chinese Magical Medicine (2002:215). In his Sanskrit-English dictionary, Monier-Williams (1899:698) defines prasenā as “a kind of jugglery,” citing the “scholiast” (surely Utpala) on Varahamihira’s BṛS (this is in addition to references to several kings named Prasena).
50. This is borne out in the course of the next several centuries, as astrology becomes an indispensable element in priestly education. On the history of this movement, see Inden 1992.
51. I maintain this position, though I also agree with Sanderson (e-mail communication, September 27, 2001) that it was a literary and stylistic issue. The latter, in my view, are at least partly an outcome of these epistemological exigencies. Sanderson defends the Indian mode of presentation as follows:
    The Indian sources give us straightforward prescriptions of kanyāvesa and similar rites involving children. These naturally tend to be a little thin on the incidentals that would animate rich descriptions, but I see no evidence that they are epistemologically inhibited. A fairly detailed “Sanskritic” prescription of the prasena ritual is seen in, for example, the Indian Buddhist Subāhuparipṛcchāsūtra. A copy of this text was in the possession of the Chinese monk Wuxing in 674. and it was translated into Chinese by Śubhākarasiṃha in 726 (T. 895), and by Fatian (T. 896) in the late tenth century. It is listed with other Tantras of the Kriyātantra class in the Tibetan Ldan dkar library inventory of the early 9th century. The fact that the ritual is mentioned only sporadically in Sanskrit texts is not surprising. This is true for most kinds of special Tantric ritual, since the Tantras are by convention overwhelmingly concentrated on setting out the obligatory rituals (initiation, regular post-initiatory and pratiṣṭhā) of this or that Mantra system and, incidentally, on the kāmya inflections of the regular rather than on such special performances.
    I deal with the Subāhuparipṛcchāsūtra shortly. Sanderson is doubtless correct about the “convention” of the Tantras in addressing certain kinds of ritual. Nevertheless, these accounts rarely exhibit the narrative intimacy of the Chinese texts. In this sense, the Subāhuparipṛcchāsūtra could be the exception that proves the rule.
52. On ritual as a learned response, see Chapter 2, n. 100.
53. See Orofino 1994b:11ff, for a lengthy discussion of the place of this text in the Kālacakra textuality.
54. Cf. Newman 1988:133. For the Sekoddeśa passage, see Orofino 1994b:134.
55. Translated from the Tibetan by Gray (2006, in press). The Sanskrit of this chapter is lost. Gray provides a translation of Bhavabhaṭṭa’s commentary on this verse: “Having repeated [the mantra] one hundred and eight [times] over a sword, etc., one will cause the descent of the luminous divinatory image.” The name of the mantra that causes the divinatory image to descend into the object is upahṛdaya.
56. Orofino 1994a. See also Bellezza 2005:23, 68f., 437f., plates 42, 43, and passim, on different kinds of divinatory mirrors and their use by Bön shamans in the largely unexplored and undocumented regions of northern Tibet.
57. Ibid.:614. Orofino suggests (pp. 615–616) that the word pratisenā is an intentional recasting of the word prasenā, thus turning it into a metaphor that conveys the idea of reflection. It would then have been modeled after words with which it is associated that also express reflection, in particular pratibhāsa (see n. 128). I have no alternative proposal.
58. This can occur only if the word from which it is derived is not Sanskrit, and prasenā is Sanskrit.
59. Personal communication, September 13, 2001. Sanderson further notes, “Tantric Saivism of this relatively public and strongly soteriological variety was not merely present in the seventh century but well established” (2001:11).
60. This account is based on a long message sent to me by Sanderson (March 10, 2002) and references he has suggested, as well as on his 2001 article.
61. Cf. Bakker 2000:15f. n42.
62. Cf. Dikshit and Sircar 1955–56; Shastri 1995: 1:169–172, 2:154–159.
63. āsītsadyaḥśivācāryaḥśrīmān varyastapovatāṃ (-tām) |śrīmadāmarddakakhyātitapovanavinirggataḥ ||
64. Dikshit and Sircar state: “Amardaka, which is the name of Kāla-Bhairava, a form of Śiva, was probably derived from the locality where Bhairava was worshipped” (1955–56:34–35).
65. See Sanderson 2001:8–10n6: These kings are the Cālukya Vikramāditya I of Bādāmī, the Eastern Gaṇgā Devendravarman, and the Pallava Narasiṃhavarman of Kāñcī.
66. svasthāveśacūrṇam ivendriyāṇām asantoṣam iva kautukasya; cf. Harṣacarita, ucchvāsa 1, Führer’s edition, pp. 37–38 (I thank Professor Sanderson for this reference); cf. also the Harṣacaritam, ed. by Musalgaonkar and Musalgaonkar, p. 61. Musalgaonkar states in his Hindi vyākhyā, “indriyoṃ ko niścal karanevāle cūrṇ ke sadṛś.” See also the edition by Kane, text p. 10, note p. 196. In this note Kane states, “he was as though a powder that influences the senses to be comfortable. The idea is: in his presence, the senses of the spectators were lulled into pleasure.” Both Kane and the Musalgaonkars, great paṇḍitas and scholars though they were, missed the point here.
    Another, later, mention of svasthāveśa is in the Kathāsaritsāgara, dated 1064 C.E.: so ’haṃ kadāpy akaraṇaṃ svasthāveśaṃ prasaṅgataḥ | śubhalakṣaṇam āsādya kaṃcit kṣatrakumārakam || (70.56) (Once I apprehended a certain ksatriya boy with good characteristics and, through perseverance, instigated him to enter a state of svasthāvesa without any apparent cause). The purpose of this svasthāvesa was to enable the instigator of the possession, an ascetic (tapasvin) student of Śuddhakīrti, to find magical herbs and ultimately the subterranean palace of a serpent king (nāgendra-bhavanam) in which he would obtain a magical sword that would enable him to become Lord of Siddhas and roam about unconquered (sa siddhādhipatir bhūtvā vicaraty aparājitaḥ || 70.61d). Recall the reference to “good characteristics” (śubhalakṣaṇaṃ) noted above by Orofino in the Subāhuparipṛcchānāmamantra.
67. I remain cautious about the proliferation of the word Tantra in contexts such as this. Thus, I avoid saying that svasthāvesa “entered into general Tantric currency.”
68. Regarding these texts, Sanderson writes:
    The Nisvāsaguhya survives in a ninth-century Nepalese ms., but seems to be one of the very earliest Tantras of the Siddhānta, a tradition for which we have epigraphical evidence from the sixth century onwards. The Tantrasadbhāva is known to Abhinavagupta and there are Nepalese mss. from around the same time. The Bṛhatkālottara, also called the ṣaṭsāhasra in reference to its length, is not cited by the famous abundantly quoting Saiddhāntikas of the period 975–1050. I know of no citation in a work that predates the twelfth century. By then it was a very popular, widely known source. The Jayadrathayāmala, also known as the Tantrarāja, was widely known by the twelfth century. Kṣemarāja quotes from the first of its four ṣaṭkas (sections of six thousand verses) and Abhinavagupta quotes from the Mādhavakula, a work that is part of the fourth. Vimalaprabodha, Rājaguru of King Arimalla of Kathmandu, who ruled from 1200–1216 C.E., knows the whole work. The Buddhist Tantric texts belong to the tenth and eleventh centuries. (personal communication, September 13, 2001)
    For more on the character of these texts, see Sanderson 2001:31–32n33. For a brief discussion on the date of the JY, which was cited by Kśemarāja in the first half of the eleventh century, see Sanderson 2002:1–2.
69. kṛtayogāñjaliḥ samyak candracakrodaroditām | cintayet paramāṃ śaktiṃ taraṅgakulavigrahāṃ |
70. Sanderson, personal communication, September 13, 2001.
71. pratisenāvatāratantre kila darpaṇakhaḍgāṅguṣṭhapradīpacandrasūryodakanetreṣv avastuṣu [read: aṣṭasu] pratisenāvatāra uktaḥ; cf. Newman 1988:133.
72. Orofino 1994a:615.
73. Sanderson has examined the relevant Śaiva texts that have survived in manuscripts. However, given the large number of such works that are cited in the extant texts and commentaries, I would be surprised if these details, and much more, were not mentioned in some of these missing texts. For our present knowledge of the names of these texts, see Sanderson 2001:3–4n1.
74. The syllables ṭha ṭha are code for svāhā. See now the translation by Qvarnstrøm (2000:600), that in part misunderstands this passage. This chapter of the Yogaśāstra is very much in the tradition of omens and portents established by Varāhamihira.
75. SuSaṃ 6.60.19: darpaṇādīn yathāchāyāśītoṣṇaṃ prāṇino yathā | svamaṇiṃ bhāskarasyosrā yathā dehaṃ ca dehadhṛk | viśanti ca na dṛśyante grahās tadvac charīriṇam ||
76. For example, Paper 1995. Though this is not the most reliable source for commentary on such material, Paper does present the evidence; for my views on this book, see F. Smith 2001.
77. Samuel writes of “the multiple misunderstandings that seem inevitably caused by any use of the term ‘shamanic’ in scholarly discourse, however carefully defined” (2000:663).
78. See Chapter 4, in which the exorcistic healers at Bālājī deny any tantric pedigree.
79. Contra Iyanaga 1985:693f., followed by Davis 2001:129. The derivation of this word can hardly be from Sanskrit ud√śiṣ, ucchiṣṭa (rejected [from the mouth]). Ucchuṣma as “the Crackler,” or, better, “the Desiccator,” is unproblematically derived from ud√śuṣ (to dry up). As an aspect of Agni, Ucchuṣma crackles or desiccates as he dries up the offerings presented to him.
80. Iyanaga 1985.
81. Stein 1995.
82. Snellgrove 1987:134–141, esp. 139. On Vajrapāṇi, Snellgrove remarks, “I confess to finding him by far the most interesting divine being throughout the whole history of Buddhism, for he has a personal history and considerable personal character” (p. 134).
83. Davidson (1991) rightly notes that the functions of myth in Buddhist practice have been overlooked. Moreover, his critique of Stein and Iyanaga must be seriously considered (p. 214ff.).
84. Ibid.:202.
85. Snellgrove 1987:139.
86. Mayer 1996, 1998.
87. This is described at length in Mayer 1996:115–128.
88. In his essay titled “Born to be Wild: Siddhas, Outcastes, Shabaras, and Local Esoterism,” Davidson counters Sanderson’s argument. He states:
    Heruka was developed in imitation of Maheśvara, and is thus the appropriation of Śaiva/Kāpālika systems for Buddhist purposes. Unfortunately, this excessively reifies the potential sources, and when we examine the record on Heruka, it appears much more problematic. While Heruka is formed in imitation of Maheśvara in the myth contained in the mid to late eighth century version of the Sarvatathāgata-tattvasaṃgraha, the 726 C.E. translation of the Subāhupariprcchā contains an apparently earlier reference to Heruka, there depicted as a local demon like a ghost (piśāca). This is in close consonance with the probable origin of Heruka, as stated in the Kālikā-purāṇa, which identifies Heruka as the divinity of a cremation ground (smasana), possibly where human sacrifice was to be performed. The cemetery was close by the Kāmākhya-pīṭha, and Heruka was provided a specific iconography. (p. 9)
    Sanderson argues this often, perhaps most appositely providing details on the “iconography of subjection” as a tool employed by both Buddhist and Hindu tantric sects (1994).
89. See Bakker 2000 for Pāsupata evidence.
90. Mayer 1998:306.
91. Some of what Mayer proposes does not strike me as right or reasonable within the extended South Asian religious complex. For example, he suggests that “the Buddhist tradition in India would have found the facts of its debts to Saivism embarrassing” (ibid.:305). For more on these Central Asian shamanistic practices, see Bellezza 2005.
92. Mayer 1996: 116. See also Granoff 1979, which employs art historical evidence to date the Buddhist Śiva to the sixth century.
93. To the question addressed in this section, Sanderson responds: “We know only that we do not know for sure that Śaiva sources teaching this practice are earlier than the Buddhist materials transmitted to China. It is only extremely probable that there were such sources for the Buddhists to draw on, and the fact that Bāṇa can refer to svasthāveśa in a literary composition strongly suggests that this was so. Certainly the descriptions of Bhairava tantric practice found in his writing are based on exactly the class of Śaiva sources that is richest in references to prasenāvidhi/svasthāveśa” (e-mail communication, September 27, 2002).
94. Strickmann 2002:208. I employ pinyin romanization unless citing a secondary source that uses the Wade-Giles system. Strickmann points out that āveśa is “sometimes translated into Chinese as ‘total entering’ (pien-ju)” (p. 207). This fits the semantic profile of āveśa as “immersion,” “absorption into,” etc.
95. Strickmann 2002: 204f., citing T. 1097, Bukong juansuo tuoluoni Zizaiwang zhou jing, the Chinese translation of Amoghapāśasūtra.
96. Ibid.:204.
97. Ibid.:204–205. Strickmann translates Amoghapāsa, “He whose Noose is Unerring,” the name given to the twelve-armed form of Avalokitesvara, with the melodramatic “Slipknot That Never Misses Its Target” (p. 326n17). The Sanskrit text of the Amoghapāśasūtra is only now in the course of being edited and published. This is in the form of a roman transcription of a codex unicus that has come to light in Tibet; cf. Kimura et al. So far, a bit more than one-third of the text is published (66 folios out of 162). However, the section translated by Strickmann has yet to appear, so we eagerly await its publication. Before this work, the only description of the text, indeed what is probably a mere fragment of it, has been Meisezahl 1962. For an interesting reference to the healing practices described in this text, see Granoff 1998b: 218n1. This work includes two edited Tibetan versions, one from Dunhuang, the other a later Kanjur version, and an edition of a fragmentary Nepalese palm leaf manuscript in Sanskrit (University Library Cambridge, Oriental Ms. 152). This dhāraṇi text sheds no light on the material dealt with here, except that many unusual words in it overlap with what we have found, appositely, kākhorda (pp. 291, 315), a kind of evil spirit (cf. Edgerton 1953:2:175, who cites this as an Iranian loanword). See also entry 3826, khakhōrda, in Turner 1969:201. Sanderson has collected a large number of attestations of this word not noted in these dictionaries. He informs me that this word “occurs widely in Mahāyāna texts and in the Rājataraṅgiṇī and in Śaiva texts that may well have been composed or redacted in Kashmir, in whose vernacular alone it has survived through to NIA” (e-mail communication, October 10, 2002). One interesting usage occurs in the Netratantra 19.132, where khārkhoda- appears as a kind of malevolent being, though Kṣemarāja, the commentator, glosses it khārkhodāḥ paraprayuktā yantrāḥ (yantras that may be used against others).
98. Cf. Strickmann 1996:226f., and in greater detail in 2002:211–218.
99. Strickmann 1996:227. The Sanskritic philological speculations in which he indulges in his long note 43 on pp. 327–328 of Chinese Magical Medicine should be summarily discarded. Causing spirits to descend is otherwise known in Tibet and South Asia. Cf. Allen 1986,Aziz 1976,Macdonald 1975, and other references mentioned in Chapter 4. The notion of the spirit or jīva of a teacher passing into the body of the lineage successor is also found in Sikhism, where it became an article of belief that the spirit of one guru passed to his successor “as one lamp lights another.” This notion gained acceptance not just in the Tibetan institution of tulkus but by the convention adopted in India by the ten Sikh gurus, who all used the signature of the first one, “Nānak,” in their compositions.
100. See Nakamura 1975:2:1092c.
101. The sole support I could find for this in Sanskrit literature—and it is vague, at best—occurs in the Hastyāyurveda, a text on the care of elephants: svapnaśīlaś ca bhavati mandakram aviceṣṭitaḥ | prasenaṃ kurute kāmaṃ gambhīraṃ vedayaty api || (2.61, p. 306). This verse occurs in a section on minor diseases (kṣudraroga-), in this case a ślaiṣmika or kapha-based condition that slows elephants down but nevertheless leaves them deeply lustful. The word prasenam is by no means clear, but it could refer to a formation of elephants. Neither Strickmann nor Davis suggest the possibility that the name Prasenajit here could refer to the hermit scholar of that name in eastern India with whom the Chinese Buddhist scholar and traveler Xuanzang reputedly studied at the end of his sojourn in India (he began his return journey to China in 643). On this Prasenajit, see Lusthaus 2002:408–412.
102. “faire déscendre le pra.”
103. Cf. Davis 2001:280f. n27 lists both Chinese and Japanese āveśa texts, as well as secondary-source references, many of them in Japanese. For the Hōbōgirin, see Lévi et al. 1929–83. On the āvesa ritual in esoteric Buddhism in Japan, a descendant of that practiced in China and Tibet, see McCullough 1973.
104. Davis 2001:124–25. I have left out Davis’s many notes to this paragraph, but see pp. 280–282nn17–27 for identification of āveśa texts and comparisons with the cognate rite in Japan.
105. Ibid.: 123–124.
106. Ibid.:124.
107. Ibid.
108. Ibid.:127.
109. Ibid.:126.
110. Davis takes this description directly from a Chinese Buddhist text (ibid.: 128).
111. Ibid.:140.
112. The names of the Chinese works cited by Strickmann and Davis that contain sections on aweishe reveal culturally sinified Buddhist titles: e.g., Buding shizhe tuoluoni binifa (Secret Rites of the Spells of the Divine Emissary, the Immovable One, T. 1202), in which the Immovable one is the tantric Buddhist deity Acala; Jingangfeng louge yiqie youzhi jing (the Yogin’s Book of All the Yogas of the Diamond-Pinnacle Pavilion,, T. 867), translated by Vajrabodhi (662–732 C.E.); Yaoshi rulai guanxing yigui fa (The Medicine Buddha Contemplation Ritual, T. 923), also translated by Vajrabodhi. Strickmann (2002:218–227) discusses treatments of negative, disease-producing possession, viz. bālagrahas, that reveal Indic influence from āyurvedic sources (e.g., Caraka 7.5, Suśruta ch. 60, see Chapter 12 for explication of these sections) or even the MBh (3.216–219). The Chinese works are: Hu zhu tongzi tuoluoni jing, or Tongzi jing (Book of the Dhāraṇi for Protecting Children, T. 1028a), translated into Chinese during the first half of the sixth century, and the Luofonu shuo jiuliao xiao’er jibing jing (Book of Rāvaṇa’s Explanations of How to Cure the Ailments of Children, T. 1330). On the latter, see Filliozat 1935, 1937. For a medically detailed account of bālagrahas, see the section from the Kaśyapasaṃhitā translated by Wujastyk (1998:212–230).
113. Davis 2001:124.
114. Ibid.:125.
115. See, most forcefully, Hardy 1983. Though this long and detailed study has received substantial criticism over the years, its principal theories regarding the influence on North Indian Sanskritic devotional culture by Tamil religious culture and sectarian poetry remain intact. Another excellent study that came out at nearly the same time is Yocum 1982, esp. pp. 187–194.
116. For example, Sanderson (2001:6n4) notes a goddess named Bahumāṃsā ([She who possesses] much flesh) in a ninth-century Nepalese manuscript of an Ur-Skandapurāṇa.
117. I have been looking into this for another current project on the development and distribution of the terminology for different types of memory in Sanskritic culture and discourse, viz. the distinctions between smṛti, smaraṇa, and smara, all derivatives from the Sanskrit root √smṛ (related, of course, to the English word “memory”). Smṛti denotes a class of legalistic socioreligious texts, cultural or religious tradition, and the function of memory; smaraṇa indicates meditation, repetition of divine name, and memorialization; smara is another word for “love” or “the god of love” (Kāmadeva, etc.).
118. The use of yantras for bhūtnivārak (warding off bhuts) is still in common practice in India. See, e.g., Hanumān-Upasanā, by Rādhā Kṛṣṇa Śrīmālī (pp. 34ff.). Among the yantras he discusses are the bhūt-pret-nivārak yantra, the bhūt-nivārak yantra, and the mūṭh-nivārak yantra. In conjunction with this, a peacock-feather fan is employed to “sweep away” spirits, especially from small children (p. 56).
119. This term is widely attested in South Asia for “exorcist.” See Mumford 1989:148n12 and Chapter 4, n. 194.
120. Mysore ms. #48062 states that the procedure described therein can be used for possession by any deity: brahmaviṣṇumaheśādi devatāvesaniscayam | This manuscript is unusual in that it does not specify that the possession occurs in any locus other than the ritualist. Recall the association of Bhairava with possession in the Prabandhacintāmaṇi of the late first millennium.
121. Unfortunately, this manuscript is incomplete and lacks a colophon. On the link between Bhairava and the sarabha in coastal Andhra Pradesh, where both are regarded as avatāras of Śiva, see Knipe 1989:142. He adds: “The sarabha rupa (monster form) of Śiva appears to be conflated with the bhairava rūpa (Vīrabhadra) in the Rajahmundry cult and its symbols, as indeed it is in the Śiva-Purāṇa” (p. 153n11). For this and other sources, see Gonda 1970b:106f. See also the translation from the Kālikā Purāṇa in O’Flaherty 1975:193–197, an account that contains several episodes of possession.
122. GOML D7763 reads: brahmacārī samabhyarcya aṣṭahāyanamātrakaḥ | yantropari ca saṃsthāpya bhasma mūrdhni vinikṣipet | … evaṃ yantraṃ samālikhya baṭukaṃ ca tathopari padmāsanena saṃsthāpya bhasmamantreṇa nikṣipet |. Mysore #48069 reads: abhyaṇganaṃ ca kṛ tu brahmacārī tathopari | svastikāsanasaṃyuktaṃ pūrvābhimukhataś śuciḥ | aṣṭahāyanamadhyasthaṃ kṛaṃ śokavivarjitam |
123. Mysore #48062: etanmantroccāraṇena pratyakṣāveśam āpnuyāt | atītānāgataṃ caiva janmāntaraphalaṃ tathā || bhaviṣyaj janma karma ca śubhāśubaphalaṃ tathā | On the link between Bhairava or Vīrabhadra and svasthāvesa, see note 9; and on the identity of Vīrabhadra in Andhra Pradesh, see Chapter 8 and Knipe 2001.
124. GOML D7763.
125. I use the word sastra guardedly in this context. Because of the amorphous nature of Tantra, it is not possible to locate a single pedagogy or set of systematics that usually qualifies the word śāstra.
126. There is no evidence that this is the same Mahīdhara who composed a commentary on the Mādhyandina recension of the Śuklayajurvedasaṃhitā.
127. The word vidyā is a synonym of mantra.
128. Compare this to Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati 1.25.75: svaikyataḥ śūlinīṃ dhyātvā svasthāveso bhavej japāt (After meditating on the goddess who holds a stake [śūlinī] and realizing one’s unity with her, one should gain svasthāvesa through the performance of japa).
129. Mantramahodadhi 5.87–90. Cf. GOML D7763: evaṃ yantraṃ samālikhya baṭukaṃ ca tathopari / padmāsanena saṃsthāpya bhasmamantreṇa nikṣipet / śatavāraṃ mantritaṃ ca āveśaṃ ca bhavedhṛvam / [corr.: bhaved dhruvam].
130. In the earlier Śaiva and Sākta texts Vidyās served as embodiments of female divinity and existed alongside the prasenā. Mahāvidyās were “specific to the late East Indian Tantric literature and its pan-Indian development” (Sanderson, e-mail communication, October 10, 2002).
131. See Strickmann 2002 for the use of an “ox bezoar,” either alone or mixed with cinnabar. When rubbed on a certain kind of seal, it “will not only summon all manner of spirits but will work large-scale geological, hydraulic, and cosmological changes as well. These include shifting mountains, draining seas, causing lightning and thunder, causing darkness in the heavens and over the earth, making the sun and moon fall from the sky, and bringing clouds and rains” (p. 323n102). On the consumption of the human gorocana, said to be located in the heart, and the powers derived from this peculiar anthropophagy, discussed in certain Yoginītantras, see Gray 2005:55f., and for more on its identity, ibid.:47-48n8; for its use as an artistic symbol in Tibetan art, see Beer 1999:188.
132. See Taylor 2001:217ff. for evidence that Woodroffe knew no Sanskrit at all.
133. Śrī Subhagānandanātha’s Manoramā glosses svasthāveśam in 9.76a as svasthasya devatāvesanam. On this peculiar incense (9.76d), he says simply sarjjaraso nāma dhūpadravyaviśeṣaḥ. It appears to have been unknown to him.
134. Dudbridge 1995:1ff., 190–191 (#84–85). Dudbridge’s interpretations are not as convincing as his translations. He relies much too closely on interpretative methodologies of possession formulated in the 1930s and 1950s, which now appear seriously dated, not least because they were based on prevailing psychoanalytic and Christian viewpoints of the day. However, compare this story with Diemberger’s brief ethnography of a teenage girl who experienced an initiatory dream, after which she became possessed, giving her the ability to recite major sections of the Gesar of Ling (2005:154). See also Baptandier 1996, which discusses the rise of the cult of Lady Linshui in Fujian province and how it was based on mediumistic activity, in which the founder, a girl named Chen Jinggu, who lived a very short life during the Tang dynasty, appears in possession. This possession often occurs in male mediums called fashi who dress as women on this occasion and address calamitous issues. See Chapter 4 note 41 on this term. It appears that most cults in China have been based on spirit-mediumship. I am increasingly convinced that this is also the case in South Asia.
135. See my review article of ten books on possession, F. Smith 2001.
136. Strickmann 2002:208.
137. Here we have a mixture of Buddhist and Daoist ritual. Strickmann writes: “We already know that Taoist written documents were burned in the flame of the incense burner, and that they make their way heavenward in the company of special emissaries, spirit-messengers transformed by priests from the breaths of their own bodies” (ibid.:210).
138. Recall the symptoms of tantric saktipāta discussed in Chapter 10 (cf. Tantrāloka 29.207–208).
139. On the unreliability of dream and memory, see, e.g., Yogasūtras 1.5–11 and commentaries. Halbwachs 1992:41ff. argues that memory is a social category while dream is individually constituted and unreliable.
140. Strickmann 1996:291ff. “Le rituel est l’essence du bouddhisme tantrique, et ses traditions oniriques font partie intégrante du processus rituel” (p. 295).
141. “Dans le livre du yogin de tous les yoga du pavillon au faîte de diamant [T. 867], les instructions recommandent de réciter le mantra d’Acala cent huit fois, de former mudrā-épée avec les doigts, et ensuite de s’endormir immédiatement. La divinité viendra alors ‘prendre possession de vous’ (āvesa), et vous verrez en rêve toutes sortes de choses concernant le bien et le mal” (ibid.:298).The possessing spirit is not identified. I suspect, however, that it is not a prasenā, which he would certainly mention if it were the invader.
142. Davis 2001:136.
143. As discussed earlier, the clientele at Bālājī and other centers of exorcistic healing in India today includes members of all classes, castes, and religious affiliations.
144. Compare this to Orofino (1994a:613), who adds: “In the same way the yogin can see the images in the ether through the power of meditation on the supreme immovable bliss once he has abandoned the pleasure of the emission of his bindu” (ibid.). The text of the Sarnath edition reads, in part: tatkāraṇam asti yena kāraṇena kumārikāyāṃ dvīndriyasaṃgharṣaṇāc cyutisukhopalabdhir nāsti | (3:88). Sanderson notes, “the expression dvīndriya, for the sex organs is standard Mantrayāna terminology” (e-mail communication, October 10, 2002).
145. Tachikawa (2000:234) points out that Tibetans distinguish visualization from possession, just as Japanese shamanic healers of the Shugendo sect do. The latter is a synthesis of Buddhism and Shinto.
146. Knecht discusses this as a general problem in deciphering shamanism. Consultations with tutelary spirits—a phenomenon just short of possession, though distinguished from it—are another possibility (2003:16).
147. Diemberger 2005:132. See ibid.:134 for a photo of a female oracle holding a divination mirror.
148. Ibid.:135. Similarly, Bellezza’s extensive ethnographic evidence (2005) of a connection between mirror divination and possession in Northern Tibet all but confirms it in the case of Ama Ta Bap.
149. For the remarkable Islamic account of the exploits of Alexander the Great, see Seyllor 2001:19–20.
150. The revolving mirror, cast under a magical spell, is mounted atop the high tower at the top of the painting. According to Khusraw, the tower was erected at the edge of the Sea of Rum (the Mediterranean Sea), which is depicted here. For a description of the scene, see ibid.:84. For another use of mirror divination in Tibet, see Yang 1993. In this practice, certain mirror divinization chanters (pra-ba) are able to “see” the written forms of the Tibetan epic Gesar of gLing, which they then copy and chant. On the possibility of the export of magical mirrors from India, or at least their concept, to the Near East at undetermined points in antiquity, see Allen Thrasher’s inquiry on “Bhattah mirrors” on the Indology-listserv dated February 22, 2006 (http://listserv.liv.ac.uk/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind0602&L=INDOLOGY&P=R1807&D=1&F=P&H=0&I=-3&O=D&T=1), and his references to Deveney 1997.
151. See, e.g., Avedon 1984:4ff.; Aziz 1976.
152. Orofino 1994a:616. On the general phenomenon of incarnation as possession in Tibetan Buddhism, see Aziz, who writes, “Tibetan Buddhism, as it is practiced in India and Nepal, allows for a host of diviners, spirit-mediums, oracular devices, monks and yogins, each of whom deals in his own way with malevolent as well as friendly forces encountered in the normal course of people’s lives” (1976:357). On the use of the word avatāra for possession in Buddhist texts (viz. the Mañjuśrimūlakalpa) see below, ch. 12 note 141. On the use of mirrors in Central Asian Islamic divination, see Levin 1996:245.
153. I am grateful to Urs App for this information. He has filmed some of these mediums (all female) in an ongoing project designed to collect some of the remaining shamanistic traditions of Taiwan on video.
154. I am grateful to John Lagerwey for this point.
155. See Alter 1992.
156. One need look no further than the stories of the baby Kṛṣṇa for attestation of this. Examples could be easily multiplied.
157. Tambiah 1970:322.
 