+++
title = "+3 Possession, Trance Channeling, and Modernity"

+++

> There is a pleasure sure In being mad, which none but madmen know.
> —DRYDEN, The Spanish Fryar, II.i

LEST ANYONE IDLY THINK THAT POSSESSION IS A phenomenon limited to antiquity and contemporary non-Western societies, and that possession studies are strictly the property of scholars, mostly anthropologists, who conduct research on exotic people in far-flung places, Michael F. Brown has written The Channeling Zone: American Spirituality in an Anxious Age, a book that addresses an increasingly well-known Western phenomenon known as trance channeling, an unambiguous, if culturally reconfigured, cognate of spirit and deity possession.1 Like spirit possession elsewhere in the world, the primary observed characteristics of trance channeling in America are sharp changes in expressive behavior accompanied by identity shifts. Trance channeling can be viewed in much the same terms as possession reported elsewhere, for example, by Srinivas in Ladakh, Sax in Garhwal, Gellner and Macdonald in Nepal, and so on: as a relatively controlled multiple personality experience framed by ritual and performance, conferring on it a safety net of cultural legitimacy, thus (largely) removing it from culturally construed realms of danger and pathology.

New Age trance channeling is almost entirely oracular, which is to say “positive.” It does not resemble the mass celebratory possession found at the festival at the Khaṇḍobā temple in Jejuri in Maharashtra when the new moon falls on a Monday (somavatī amāvāsyā),2 the possession at the Draupadī festival in Tamilnadu documented by Hiltebeitel, or the ritual vow-taking involving possession during the new year’s festival called Thaipusam in Malaysia or Singapore.3 Although the possession in these locations is also “positive” and immensely empowering to participants, it may also be dangerous or violent, with self-flagellation (at Jejuri), animal sacrifice (in the Draupadī cult), and impalement (during Thaipusam). Just as New Age channeling is not celebratory or “sacrificial,” neither is it disease-producing, a “negative” infestation of evil or unwanted spirits. Two of the regular (though not invariant) features of New Age channeling are the elision of memory and the presence of elements of stagecraft, the second and third of Sax’s criteria for oracular possession. Although not identical to South Asian ritual possession, nearly all trance channeling occurs in ritual situations, for example, during a scheduled meditation or before a client or audience. In the latter cases, like mediumship elsewhere, it is benign, with an eye toward attracting a following.4 And like all rituals, these are planned, staged, and culturally sanctioned events.

An element New Age channeling shares with certain other varieties of possession is nostalgia. An analogous, but not far-fetched, example of the manifestation of nostalgia surfaced in The New York Times Magazine of February 25, 2001. This article, titled “Theme Park on a Hill,” discussed a new “Holy Land Experience,” a fifteen-acre Holy Land theme park associated with Disney World in Orlando, Florida. This tourist attraction features a “peaceable Zion rising above Florida’s marshes” and offers “a ray of hope for its embattled counterpart in the Middle East.”5 All of this for a mere $17. Much possession is of historical or mythically imagined or reimagined personalities.6 As in the Holy Land Experience, these personalities are vividly brought to life—alterity is introduced—through theatricalization, in this case mediumistic skill, of memory traces, fantasy, and nostalgia. However contrived, they take on a life of their own in the present, as documented in Uganda, where mediums supposedly possessed by warriors of real and imagined armies of the past generated a brutal revolution in the 1980s,7 or in Thailand, where rituals of possession mediumship are openly nostalgic of earlier eras and cultural forms.8 In South Asia, the mass possession in Tamilnadu of Draupadī’s armies affects the dynamics of the entire community, even out of the festival season. Similarly, the Yelm, Washington, alternative community led by J. Z. Knight, who, the community claims, channels an ancient warrior named Ramtha, is structured to replicate the social roles of its archetypal community. This nostalgia of a glorious past is transferred to the present through an elaborate network of lessons with multilayered abstract meanings, rather than as the thing itself, rekindling the archetypal narrative for the sake of its very manifestation, as is the case, for example, in South Asia.

PLATE 1. Boopsie welcomes the 25,000-year-old-warrior Hunk-Ra into her body DOONESBURY © 1987 G. B. Trudeau. Reprinted with permission of UNIVERSAL PRESS SYNDICATE. All rights reserved.

The messages transmitted in channeling sessions largely concern physical and psychological healing, personal transformation, and inner growth. Channeling thus becomes a vehicle for or a practice of growth, healing, or “spiritual evolution.” Within the subculture of New Age channeling, healing is regarded as the transformation of a complex network of social, psychological, and spiritual conditions, which acts as the primary cause of physical illness or psychological imbalance. Neither pathogens nor spirit possession are considered essential factors in disease production, or at least they are not dealt with in any active therapeutic sense in New Age channeling. This is also asymmetrical with South Asian possession in that spirit mediums in South Asia are not dealt with in any active therapeutic sense in New Age channeling. This is somewhat asymmetrical with South Asian possession in that spirit mediums in South Asia are often approached to combat possession by malignant deities and spirits that are believed to cause disease or erratic behavior. These spirits are dealt with directly by exorcists, as entities bearing a palpable, if usually undefinable, existential reality, rather than as materializations of social, psychological, and spiritual conditions. Thus traditional trance healers are also exorcists or spirit doctors. They employ spirits or deities to exorcise other, more malignant, spirits; in other words, a strategy of possession—more aptly counterpossession—is deployed to combat possession.9 Perhaps more to the point, though, is that healing through possession in South Asia is viewed as a medical alternative to serious health and life crises, rectified by the transformative power of a deity. As Tara Devi, a lower middle-class housewife in rural Himachal Pradesh, educated up to the fifth grade, states: “the Mother’s grace came upon me, and the world became good.” She dispensed mantras and sacred ash to the afflicted who came to her in possession, and “[t]hrough that they become all right. The world has become good.” Tara Devi’s emphasis is, ostensibly at least, not on her personal psychosocial empowerment, but on the transformative goodness of the goddess.10 As a medium and a healer, Tara Devi is, like most Western trance channelers, an ethical and religious traditionalist, part of an effort (probably unconscious) to move from the periphery to the center, to utilize Lewis’s terms.

For Western trance channelers, ignoring or downgrading the concept of a predominantly pathogenic cause of disease is part of the New Age presentation of its “new paradigm” of choice and a simultaneous rejection of the old and weary mechanistic paradigm of Descartes, Newton, and Darwin. However, as the pathogenic contribution to disease production is becoming increasingly understood and accepted in South Asia, mediumistic healers have adjusted their theories and practices to accommodate this notion. It is not unusual for a healer or medium to give a diseased client an empowered or ensorcelled substance such as water, ash from a sacred fire (vibhūti), or sweets previously offered to a household or temple deity (prasād) as a healing agent for an identifiable disease such as amoebiasis or malaria.

One of the interesting features of oracular possession in South Asia, Africa, the islands of the South Pacific, and elsewhere is that it has been on the increase in recent decades.11 Under the hegemony of Western colonialism and Christianity (at least when the latter served as an agent of the former), possession was, in general, on the decrease, as was the case in the Pacific islands. However, in its encounter with modernity—or, in Western eyes, with postmodernity—possession has been embraced as an indigenous cultural practice.12 As such it has undergone a renewal, at least in places where Christianity has not been dominant or became detached decades ago from colonial interests. An example of the accessibility of possession today is Taiwan, which now has a “Republic of China Mediums’ Association.” This association opened its own school for mediums in 1992 and, according to a 1989 disclosure, listed 62 organizational members and 1,940 individual members, numbers (though probably not percentages) that appear to approach the prevalence of spirit-mediumship in China during the eleventh and twelfth centuries.13 Similarly, spirit mediumship has increased in Thailand since the decline of missionary Christianity in recent decades. In northern Thailand a highly developed “Praise Ceremony” is increasingly performed to initiate, and therefore acculturate and legitimize, mediums across boundaries of local spirit lineages. This ceremony, steeped in both local spirit culture and transnational Buddhism,14 has professionalized and institutionalized local spirit mediums. Rosalind Morris remarks that such mediumship is only gradually acquired; professional standards can be achieved only after the possession becomes regularized and controlled. Mediumship “is only recognized by other mediums after the identity of the spirit has been clearly articulated and the medium has come to accept the professional obligations that attend possession through the acquisition of a khan [spirit offering] dish.”15 In other words, the democratic ideologies of secular modernity have not suppressed possession, as did the religious and sectarian ideologies of Christianity, especially when the latter was represented through colonialism as the bearer of progress.

In the modern West as well, secular modernity has proved to be more hospitable than the dominant religions in its support of the ideologies and practices of the New Age, including channeling. In Africa, South Asia, and Oceania, as in the modern West, the personal empowerment that is a major component of possession (or channeling) abides in religious or spiritual realms and discourse modes, areas in which the dominant sociopolitical cultures are most open to alternative expression. Possession and channeling, then, have been legitimated by an amicable relationship of discourse with sociopolitical cultures. In this way, the dominant cultures have, by necessity, created recognizable and tacitly accepted outlets for alternative experience and expression. In the West, such legitimization by the dominant secular society has lent a vigor and creativity to the New Age movement. Perhaps this has been felt nowhere more strongly than by the advocates and practitioners of trance channeling, as witnessed by the explosion of books, videotapes, and media coverage of the phenomenon.16

As noted, oracular possession has been on the increase in South Asia. Gellner attributes this increase in Nepal since about 1950 to democratization (prajātantra), which has emboldened a large number of people, especially women, to establish themselves as regular mediums. This has become a new and viable wage-earning opportunity for women in certain oppressively patriarchal rural areas of Nepal—not a trivial factor in the general empowerment offered by possession.17 Thus, as with New Age channeling, the proliferation of possession in Nepal and elsewhere in South Asia is a populist artifact of democratization. In this way, democracy has done well its job of leveling inequalities: It has been a mechanism for shrinking the gap between laity and deity in the West and between the laity and the priestly elite in South Asia.18 Nevertheless, in spite of similar dynamics of cultural legitimization and forces of modernity at work in the West and in other less-privileged regions of the world, the personal empowerment experienced by New Age trance channelers displays a considerably different texture from that experienced by women and others of lower social rank in developing societies whose possession is a temporary expression of social or political dominance in a general climate of oppression.

Further comparison can be made between New Age trance channeling and spirit mediumship in developing countries. In America and elsewhere in the West, workshops on contacting spirit guides and guardian angels are commonly held, all in search of “the primal experience of transformation.”19 Although contacting spirit guides is by no means synonymous with possession, such New Age workshops may not be unfairly compared to spirit initiations and apprenticeships in Oceania and South Asia.20 A strong difference, however, is that the latter arise from the imperatives of need, the synchronicities of oppression, or long-term religious or spiritual commitment, while the former, New Age channeling workshops and even correspondence courses, are a “product” arising from media-based culture (the ready availability of books and videotapes by trance channelers) and widespread prosperity. Whereas the experiences of transformation and empowerment are common to New Age trance channeling and Third World possession, the clientele in the West are generally upwardly mobile, not (in general) restricted in their movement by centuries of social conditioning and oppression. As we have seen, though, the latter situation is changing, as democratization in Taiwan, Oceania, and probably South Asia as well has led to attendance at oracular and festival possession events as much a matter of choice than of local tradition. Although it is probable that a preponderance of New Age trance channelers are women, it is not an established or overwhelming majority. In South Asia and other more “traditional” societies, this is also the case, as many studies have shown. On balance, Lewis’s insight that possession and its incumbent empowerment are the rather “natural” property of the oppressed and underprivileged has been disproved by developments in the past forty years.

The content of channeling and possession serves as another point of comparison. New Age channeling usually assumes the form of general or abstract advice that, if followed, reinforces the notion of a new scientific paradigm that becomes the basis for spiritual enlightenment. Therefore, more often than not, the channeled message is presented in glowing salvific terms, not least because it enshrouds itself in scientific (or at least scientistic) certainty.21 The ontological basis for this salvific message, as well as for the new scientific paradigm, is that the self is fluid or permeable, that it is not a psychophysical entity limited by and equated with the boundaries and irrevocable entropy of the physical form. This is not simply a rejection of both the Western scientific assumption of an impermeable unitary self and the psychological notions that have arisen out of the biomedical model constructed on this assumption. It is equally a declaration of a new model in which the self does not terminate with the body but is a biomagnetic field that can be influenced by other biomagnetic fields. This opens the floodgates to the notion of receiving information from various extrapersonal sources, while simultaneously embracing the normalcy, indeed the exalted potential, of dissociation. As we have seen above, this is not far from Littlewood’s insights into the mechanics and deployment of dissociation or of Castillo’s assessment of its adaptive nature.

Although this is prominent in some possession noted by ethnographers, it is absent from the classical literature of India. More often in the classical accounts, detailed information about the past—less often the future—is transmitted through possession, but usually the purpose of possession (at least positive possession) is either possession itself, the mere fact of expressing the personality of the deity or spirit or a more “educational” goal, such as Śaṅkara’s possession of the body of the dead king Amaruka (parakāya-praveśa) in order to gain carnal knowledge without compromising his own vow of celibacy (about which I say more below).22 Moreover, the emotional trajectory is usually different. In South Asian possession, the emotional constitution of the deity or spirit is often vividly reflected; indeed, this is often the point of the possession. South Asian possession is often accompanied by acts of violence, for example, in the possession by a blood-drinking goddess or an ancestor who demands an animal sacrifice. However, in New Age trance channeling, the message is, on the whole, more important than the medium. The emphasis is almost exclusively on the exalted and the inspirational; there is little place for the idiosyncratic past of the channeler, for the childhood traumas and repressed demons that feed the jumbled personal and social histories that constitute the persona of the channeler and bind it into its own time and place. This is why channeled material translates effectively into the written word, while South Asian possession, when transcribed, loses much of its meaning, which is often bound up in its immediacy or presence or conversely holds most of its meaning in local context. For this reason, the primary experience of an audience attending a channeling session is usually one of hearing words of well-established wisdom, with the significance of an attendant emotional state subsumed to the primacy of the message. This confers a prevailing mood of warm and fuzzy friendliness that serves the expectations of the targeted clientele as well as the proprietary interests of the channeler.

This presentation of channeling as a safe spiritual, emotional, and psychic zone may be contrasted with the intense and unpredictable emotional engagement that is usually a distinguishing feature of possession in South Asia and elsewhere. In part this is because emotions are accorded greater substantiality and validity in South Asia, where bhāva (emotionally integrative experience—much more is said about this below) is culturally and religiously sanctioned, rather than realized solely through transgressive and extrain-stitutional means.23 The New Age presentation of channeling as a zone of safety, rather than risk, danger, or violence, reflects the need of New Agers to be more secure in their spiritual vision and less out of place in a postmodern, dislocated world. Channeling, with its smooth and mildly ecstatic purposiveness, provides a rootedness, a continuity, which confers a structure for authentication of humanness and a vision of goodness, both of which empower through (at least nominal) rejection of a cultural system characterized as discontinuous and violent. History is constructed and personally appropriated, rather than continually erased. Higher-risk practices, such as those found in South Asia—including mass role playing, fire walking, impalement, and public sacrifice—rearrange the power-sharing in a rather opposite manner, by erasing both history and the present moment while consciously engaging nonlinearity, even if this nonlinearity has been established through engagement with varieties of Purāṇic and other similar narrative. The embodiment of a dangerous spirit or hungry goddess is empowering because it nullifies the gap between the rural and urban poor and middle classes (regardless of caste or sex) and the political elite. This gap is not nullified through assertion of a more accurately constructed or envisioned universe, as in New Age channeling, but through a singular act of deconstruction. The cessation of the gap, its nonrecognition, constitutes the negotiation that confers social empowerment within South Asian oracular and other “positive” possession. In more than one way, then, the dispossessed become the possessed, at least temporarily. That said, I must add that if channeling were regarded as entirely safe, it would lose its valence; conversely, if possession were regarded as entirely risky, it would also lose its valence. In other words, exceptions to this rather offhand depiction of the emotional construction of New Age channeling and South Asian possession must surely be numerous—which urges me to agree with others in recognizing the difficulties incumbent in cross-cultural comparisons of emotion.24

Although the rather consistent emotional construction of trance channeling might suggest otherwise, a prominent feature of channeling is that it adumbrates a moral and epistemological relativism while displaying a remarkably (or perhaps unremarkably) consistent potpourri of earth-centered spirituality, cosmic orderliness, human divinity, and exhortations of personal responsibility.25 Yet South Asian and other possession reveals practically the opposite: moral consistency, though not absolutism, and a chaotic, indeed often frightening, variety of possession states, including all the elements mentioned above—impalement, body-piercing, and blood sacrifice. The reasons for this appear to lie in the relatively greater importance of the message in New Age channeling—and the messages can be very different—while in South Asian possession, as mentioned, the process, the action, and the “facticity” of manifesting the divine is paramount.26

Another point of comparison is that of spirit ownership. In South Asia, possession is democratic in the sense that almost never does one have exclusive rights to a deity.27 However, the situation is rather more complicated with spirits. Although deities are capable of having multiple hosts, this is not necessarily the case with spirits, which are regarded as more easily subject to individual control. This is strikingly highlighted in an article by N. K. Wagle describing a number of court cases in early seventeenth- to early nineteenth-century Maharashtra, in which spirits (bhūts), only occasionally specified, were the accused, directed by experts (bhutāle, bhutālī) to cause disease, wreak havoc on personal property, steal documents, and even commit murder. Although it was impossible to punish the offending spirit, the ritual expert or, more generally, the one who hired him or her was punished.28 Comparing this to possession elsewhere in the world and with New Age channeling reveals that possession is not always democratic. In a few instances, single individuals have secured exclusive rights to possession of a particular spirit, such as in Uganda.29 In the West, where channeling is big business, serious issues of intellectual property rights have arisen. On more than one occasion, channelers have resorted to copyright law in order to ensure their ownership of a certain spirit, formally, of course, the spirit’s name, for example Ramtha—thus, according to their logic, the spirit him or herself.30

The copyright issue is wrought with conflict for channelers, as it opposes the peculiar American populism that serves their spiritual and economic interests. The obvious problem here, and admittedly an awkward one, is that spirits cannot be brought under legal contract, at least not in America.31 Thus the solution—the copyright and subsequent commodification of a name, very much in the Western (particularly American) spirit (so to speak)—has led Brown to conclude that channeling will eventually enter the cultural mainstream.32

Although trance channelers depict themselves as an exclusive breed apart from society, their teachings contain a reformist message that places them squarely within the accepted range of Western social, religious, and economic processes. Thus just as modernity and secular culture have bestowed legitimation and protection to the New Age and trance channeling, channelers have reciprocated by legitimizing modernity. It is therefore understandable that the New Age movement has vigorously embraced the political rights and freedoms that modernity has effected; indeed, these rights and freedoms serve and protect the New Age. And understandably, if ironically, it rejects the science that has accompanied modernity and given rise to it in the first place. All of this is on display in the hundreds of thousands of Internet sites dedicated to channeling, as well as in the numerous “How to” books and videotapes on channeling that fit into mainstream cultural categories.33

Brown contends that “channeling has a democratic undercurrent that subverts centralized power,”34 but this undercurrent has an ameliorating, rather than an alienating, edge to its subversion. As is the case with possession examined in ancient and modern India, known through classical literature and anthropological investigation, it is a subversion that does not seriously threaten the dominant order. Rather, it provides new rationale for the old established moral and social order. The alternative linear histories that are both revealed and employed in channeling are, at least nominally, reformist, as mentioned; but, in the end, channelers’ support for the mainstream means of distribution of channeled knowledge establishes both a mainstream niche and a mainstream necessity for channeling. Indeed, the commodification of spirits and channeling is closely akin to the commodification of knowledge in any literate society, including ancient India, in which esoteric and ritualistic strategies of gaining knowledge and power required an established literate priesthood that traded on its exclusive access to the world of the gods and required exorbitant dakṣiṇā for its services.

The demographics of channeling support this. Consistent with possession reported elsewhere, channeling is a phenomenon that occurs increasingly among the middle class and upwardly mobile working class, classes that are scarcely rebellious. A demographic profile, hinted at above, reveals the preponderance of channelers who share a fairly similar socioeconomic profile and set of intellectual interests. On the whole, they are white, well educated, economically secure Baby Boomers. As with possession reported in South Asia and almost everywhere else,35 most channelers are women, who, says Brown, “are free to assert religious authority and to experience a liberating androgyny.”36 Like its historical antecedents, and akin to its cross-cultural cognates, channeling depicts contemporary anxieties about central themes and tensions in Western culture. And like possession elsewhere, New Age trance channeling serves the ends of physical, emotional, and social healing in innovative but not revolutionary ways. We examine below how this squares with the evidence from Indic texts; it must suffice for the moment to note that, in the Vedas and Upaniṣads, the Mahābhārata, Buddhist texts, Tantra and elsewhere, the demographic profile is much broader, as are the modes, varieties, and goals of possession.

Whatever possession was in South Asia, it was never thought of in terms of personal growth or “spiritual evolution.” At best, South Asian deity or spirit possession and Western trance channeling are vehicles for self-empowerment within the context of the relevant subcultures. Most interesting is that effacement of the individual personality, rather than its normative manifestation, should be empowering. Loss of active control, loss of recognizable personality, and submersion of personal ego and identity are symptoms of pathology in both āyurvedic and Western medical analyses. However, within the context of possession they are empowering and thus attractive—even compelling—forms of expression. As such they are regarded as the very antithesis of pathology; indeed, they are regarded as symptoms of sound psychic and spiritual health. In fact, this is consistent—one might say radically consistent—with dominant religious belief: complete submersion of the individual into the identity of a perceived higher (or sometimes lower) power. In many mainstream religions—and all religions appear to be mainstream in the marketplace of the New Age—this is consistent with notions that dispassion and ego dissolution are the keys to heaven or enlightenment. Effacement of individual personality within a religious or spiritual context is in keeping with fundamental notions of individual and social power in democratic secular culture. Despite this resonance, possession in South Asia, as known from both ethnographies and classical literature, exhibits a breadth of possibilities, as one might expect from a culturally normative experience, while Western trance channeling remains relatively narrow in intellectual and performative expression, as one might expect from an experience with comparatively limited normativity.37
