+++
title = "02 Typical Literary and Iconographic Contexts"

+++

The Mahavidyas are prominent primarily in tantric literature and in a few late *sakta **purdnas *and *upa **purdnas *\(minor, later, or subsidiary *purdnas\). *The *tantras *contain little narrative material about the Mahavidyas. They are primarily interested in providing the details of how to worship the Mahavidyas and do not dwell on the meaning of their symbolism or stories that feature them. A typical tantric treatment of a Mahavidya includes, first, her mantra, which is believed to represent her essence; a devotee seeking the goddess's blessing or power must repeat it continually. Next, the goddess's *dhydna *\(meditation\) mantra describes her physical appearance in some detail; again, the devotee is to fill his or her mind with this description of the goddess while ritually approaching her. The text also gives the goddess's *rahasya *\(essence or secret\), which is usually similar to her *dhydna *mantra. It also lists her *kvaca *\(armor\), usually in the form of a prayer to protect her devotee on all sides. A *tantra *usually includes the goddess's *name **stotra, *a list of her names or epithets. Sometimes it describes her yantra \(a schematic drawing generally composed of circles, triangles, and stylized lotuses\), along with directions for constructing and meditating upon it. In addition to this, the text sometimes gives directions for routine *piijd *\(worship\), in which various items are offered to the goddess.





In *purdnic *literature, only a few late texts mention the Mahavidyas. They do, however, contain fairly detailed stories about the origin of the Mahavidyas as a group. These myths are important in providing interpretive contexts for the group as a whole.

Certain goddess hymns also mention the Mahavidyas. For example, they are named in the *Durgd-cdlisd, *a famous hymn of forty verses to the goddess Durga. They are also mentioned in the *Kdmdkhyd-cdlisd. *A hymn to the goddess Gariga says that the Mahavidyas Tārā, Dhumavati, Matarigi, and Bhairavi are her manifestations.7 The purpose of their inclusion in such hymns is to demonstrate that the main deity being praised—for example, Durga, Kamakhya, or Gariga—appears in many forms throughout the world and that all goddesses are simply her manifestations.

Iconographically, the Mahavidyas are often shown as a group in goddess temples. Their images are usually painted on the temple walls; more uncommonly, they may be represented by stone or metal images. Sometimes the presiding goddess of the temple in which the Mahavidyas are depicted is herself one of them. In the Kali-bari temple dedicated to the goddess Kali in Simla, for example, the Mahavidyas are painted on the walls surrounding the *garbha **grha, *the inner shrine room, which houses an image of Daksina-kali. Kali herself is depicted among the Mahavidyas.8 In a temple to Dhumavati in Varanasi, similarly, the Mahavidyas are painted on the interior of the outer walls and include the usual group. Again in Varanasi, at the Laksmi Kund temple, the images of the Mahavidyas are painted around the inside door frame of the main entrance to the temple and include Kamala \(a form of Laksmi\).

In other cases, the Mahavidyas are depicted in temples dedicated to goddesses who are not among the Mahavidyas. Images of the Mahavidyas are carved on pillars of a gate at Naina-devi temple in the district of Bilaspur in Himachal Pradesh. They are shown on the interior walls of a temple dedicated to Carai-devi-mata in Siddhapur on the outskirts of Dharmsala in Himachal Pradesh. Caral-devi is a local deity; her temple was established by truckers who sought the goddess's protection for their union building. At a Camunda-devi temple located about fifteen kilometers from Dharmsala, the Mahavidyas are painted on the interior walls of the central shrine. An inscription states that the goddesses have been depicted according to the *Sdkta-pramoda, *a well-known text that describes the Mahavidyas. When I asked why the Mahavidyas were depicted in the temple, the priest replied that Camunda-devi was a form of Kali, the chief of the Mahavidyas. In his mind, then, this temple is an example of the type in which the Mahavidyas appear as a group in a temple dedicated to one of them. Hindu texts, however, almost always distinguish Camundadevl from Kall, and they are different in appearance.





Two other temples whose primary deity is not a Mahavidya are interesting because they are related to Sati and the origin of the Mahavidyas. The temple of Jvalamukhl-devl in Himachal Pradesh prominently depicts the Mahavidyas on the walls of a large pavilion, separate from the main shrine, which houses an image of Durga.9 Jvalamukhl-devi's temple is said to be the place where the goddess Sati's tongue fell when her body was chopped up by Visnu and so is one of the *sakta **pFthas, *sacred goddess sites scattered all over India.10 As this is the case, Jvalamukhi is associated with Satl, who, as we shall see below, is said to be the origin of the Mahavidyas in certain mythological accounts of their origin. Similarly, the famous Kamakhya-devi shrine near Gauhati in Assam is said to be the place where Sati's yoni \(vulva\) fell to earth. The hillside on which the main shrine is located has small shrines to each of the Mahavidyas.

At the Bajresvari-devl temple in Kangra, large paintings in an alcove called the *sakti **bhavan *show the Mahavidyas. The Amber Fort, about eleven kilometers east of Jaipur in Rajasthan, has a temple to Sila-devl; a large double door at the main entrance to the temple depicts the ten Mahavidyas.11 In the Durga Saptasatl temple in Nagawa, just south of Varanasi, they are painted in a row on one of the inner walls of the main shrine.12 The Mahavidyas are also shown in bas-relief on the exterior walls of the temple at the Ramakrishna Math in Varanasi.

Temples dedicated to the group of Mahavidyas themselves are rare, in my experience. Indeed, I have been able to find only one. In the section of north Calcutta known as Cossipore, near the cremation ground on the Hoogly River, is a small temple dedicated to the Dasamahavidyas. It contains ten *\(dasa\) *images of the Mahavidyas. Sodasl is in the center and is larger than the rest. On her right, from the most distant to the closest, are Bagala, Matarigl, Kamala, and Dhumavatl. On her left, from closest to farthest, are Kali, Tārā, Bhuvaneśvarī, Bhairavi, and Chinnamasta. The temple enshrines several *lirigams *\(phalluses\), connoting the presence of Siva and suggesting his connection with the Mahavidyas.





The presence of the Mahavidyas at the Kamakhya temple at Kamarupa in Assam is unusual in the abundance and variety of images throughout the site.13 This temple is an important *sakta *center according to many texts, because it is the place where Sati's yoni fell to earth, and hence her *adi **pitha *\(primordial or original seat\). It is also strongly associated with the Mahavidyas. Stone yonis in the main temple represent the Mahavidyas Sodasi, Matarigl, and Kamala. Indeed, some informants identify Kamakhya herself with Sodasi. The other Mahavidyas \(and other goddesses as well\) have small shrines or temples located nearby.14 Several of these smaller shrines are associated with Siva *lingams. *The Tara temple is quite large and resembles the central shrine. The Bhairavi shrine has images of the other nine Mahavidyas on the walls near the ceiling. The central representations of the Mahavidyas in these shrines usually are not anthropomorphic and are sometimes difficult to see at all, as they are obscured by flowers, clothing, or offerings or are located in underground caves that are open for *darsan *\(viewing by devotees\) only on special occasions. Sometimes this representation is a yoni and is associated with a spring \(as in the main shrine as well\).





The Mahavidyas are prominent iconographically in two large goddess festivals in Bengal, Durga Puja \(Navaratra\) and Kali Puja \(Divali\). During Durga Puja, artisans construct thousands of large clay images featuring Durga as Mahisamardini \(the slayer of the buffalo demon Mahisa\). These images are usually part of an elaborate tableau that includes the goddesses Sarasvati and Laksmi and the gods Ganesa and Kartikeya. Traditional renditions of this divine tableau have a halolike panel called the *cal citra *\(literally, "roof picture"\) behind and encircling the central image of Durga. This frame depicts deities or scenes from Hindu mythology. It often shows the Mahavidyas, giving the unmistakable impression that they are different forms of the goddess Durga.

During Kali Puja, devotees establish clay images of Kali all over Bengal. The images are often set in a tableau featuring Siva, Ramakrishna, and Bamakhepa \(two famous Bengali Kali devotees\) or some aspect of Kali mythology or iconography. In recent years, Kali's tableau has included the other Mahavidyas. I saw two examples of this during Kali Puja in October 1992. Both sets of Mahavidya images were set up in central Calcutta, and both featured Kali in the center of the row often goddesses. Her image was far larger than the others; it was clear that she held the preeminent position. Indeed, a man at one of *the **pandals *referred to the Mahavidyas as "the ten Kalis." For the most part, the images were faithful duplications of the tantric *dhyana *mantras that describe the appearance of the Mahavidyas.15


