+++
title = "07 The Mahāvidyās and Magical Powers"

+++

We have already touched on the association of the Mahavidyas with magical powers, but it is so persistent that we should discuss it in more detail before turning to a treatment of the individual goddesses. Hindu literature is full of stories in which individuals, often demons, undertake ascetic and meditative practices in order to acquire special abilities with which they hope to achieve power, wealth, sex, or some other worldly pleasure or reward. In these stories, it is clear that they employ meditative and ascetic practices to attain selfish, worldly goals rather than what we might think of as spiritual ones. Texts on yoga say that one can acquire special powers *\(siddhis\) *by practicing yoga, but warn against indulging in them and thereby perverting the spiritual quest.89





Other Hindu texts deal specifically with magical powers. The *Ddmara**tantra, *for example, is devoted entirely to describing the use of mantras to acquire *siddhis, *particularly healing ones, but also the kinds often associated with the Mahāvidyās, such as causing strife, paralyzing or obtaining victory over an enemy, and attracting a person of the opposite sex.90 The *Phetkdrini-tantra *describes six magical powers *\(sat **karmdni\): **sdnti *\(pacification\), *vaslkarana *\(subjugation\), *sta?nbhana *\(immobilization or paralyzing\), *uccdtana *\(eradication\), *vidvesana *\(sowing dissension\), and *mdrana *\(causing death\).91 This text, which is named after Kali as "the howling one" \(Phetkarini\), has chapters on several of the Mahāvidyās, thereby associating the quest for magical powers with the Mahāvidyās specifically. The six magical acts are also described in the *Salya-tantra, *the *Dattdtreya**tantra,92 *and the *Udddmara-tantra.93, *The *Kalarudra-t**antra *"describes destructive rites to be executed with the help of *mantras *of fearsome goddesses such as Dhumavati."94 The *Satkarmadlpikd *and the *Kdmaratna *are also preoccupied with magical acts.95 The *Sdradd-tilaka-tantra *\(23.122\!?.\) mentions a list of six magical practices: *sdnti *\(cure of disease and the expulsion of evil spirits\), *vasya *\(bringing others under one's control\), *stam**bhana *\(paralyzing the activity of others\), *vidvesa *\(causing dissension\), *uccdtana *\(compelling someone to leave home\), and *mdrana *\(killing by will\).96 The *Brhaddharma-purdna *says that the Mahāvidyās as a group give the powers of eradication, attracting, paralyzing, killing by wishing it, making a person sick, controlling speech, causing a person to get old, and preserving one's youth. These are said to be the duties of the Mahavidyas.97

Other groups of goddesses are identified with specific *siddhis *in some tantric texts. In the Srividya school of Tantrism, which is dominant in South India, we find a group of *tenyoginis *\(female beings endowed with magical powers\) who personify ten *siddhis: *the powers to make small, to become light, to become large, to become superior, to control others, to have an irresistible will, to enjoy, to gain all of one's desires, to obtain anything, and to control desires.98 In this case, the goddesses not only grant these powers but actually represent, or are identical with, them.

Individual Mahāvidyās are often associated with magical powers. Matarigi is said to give all kinds of *siddhis, *especially the power by which whatever one says comes true *\(vdk **siddhi\).99 *Kali has a long history of association with magical powers. In the Bengali *marigal **kavyas, *Kali is often the main deity and bestows magical powers on her devotees. In the *Kalikd**mangal-kdvya, *for example, the hero Sundara succeeds in finding and winning the heroine, Vidya, by means of magical powers acquired in worshiping Kali.100 In the *Sdkta-pramoda, *Siva says that Dhumavati is worshiped primarily for the *siddhi *of killing one's enemies.101 Also in the *Sdkta**pramoda *we read this prayer to Chinnamasta: "Give me *siddhis *and destroy my enemies."102 The Mahavidya who is most consistently associated with magical powers is Bagalamukhi. The *Bagaldmukhi-rahasya *says that she is worshiped for paralyzing, eradication, and control over the planets. Different recipes are given to achieve these different powers. To achieve the ability to kill at will, one should burn mustard oil and blood of a she-buffalo in a sacrificial fire, while for eradication one should burn the feathers of a crow and a vulture.103 The *Sdkta-pramoda *says that worship of Sodasi \(Tripura-sundari\) gives knowledge of all and makes one wealthy, immune to poison, authoritative in speech, and free from sickness.104





The importance of magical powers in the worship of the Mahāvidyās might be understood from at least two points of view. First, and perhaps obviously, worship generally can be prompted by specific desires, frustrations, and needs. A deity is approached for help. In this sense, it is not surprising to find the Mahāvidyās associated with granting a range of blessings and powers. Other deities also bestow a variety of blessings, including magical powers.

Second, the adept worships the Mahāvidyās by developing and employing mental capacities through meditation. Tantric yoga is supposed to awaken one's consciousness, to expand and intensify it. That magical powers as well as transformative wisdom might be associated with this process is understandable, and many of the magical powers that are specified relate directly to mental powers. In exploring and expanding one's consciousness, one discovers new dimensions to one's psychic capacities. Like the *kundalini *serpent rising and awakening the *cakras, *causing the lotuses to bloom, the adept awakens aspects or dimensions of his consciousness and realizes that his mental or psychic capacities are much greater than he might have imagined. Insofar as the Mahāvidyās might be thought of as aspects or stages of consciousness in the spiritual quest, the association *of **siddhis *with them is not surprising.


