+++
title = "08 The Significance of the Term *Mahāvidyā *"

+++

A literal translation of the term *mahavidya *is "great knowledge," while a somewhat less literal translation might be "supreme \(or superior or complete\) knowledge \(or wisdom\)." There are several possibilities for what the name tells us about the nature and function of the Mahāvidyās. It is not obvious why these ten goddesses should have been so designated, but several explanations are possible.





I have been told by two scholars of Tantrism in Varanasi105 that the term *dasamahavidya *as it applies to the ten goddesses is technical and means the "ten great mantras," *vidya *generally being used in this technical sense in tantric contexts. In his commentary on the *Lalitd-sahasrandma, *Bhaskararaya says: "The difference between *Mantra *and *Vidya *is that the former has reference to male deities and the latter to female ones."106 Indeed, the first order of business in many tantric texts that discuss or describe the Mahāvidyās is to give their mantras, which consist of a few syllables. The mantra, it is often said, is highly secret and extremely powerful. It is a given in the tantric context, in fact, that the mantra is identical with the goddess. It is not that the mantra *belongs **to *the goddess, which is the way one is often tempted to understand the relationship between the deity and the mantra; the situation, rather, is that the mantra *is *the goddess. Jan Gonda says: "The essence of a *mantra *... is the presence of the deity: only that *mantra *in which the *devata *has revealed his or her aspects can reveal that aspect. The deity is believed to appear from the *mantra *when it is correctly pronounced."107

There is a long-standing tradition in Hinduism that sound is the essence of reality. The idea *oisabda **brahman *is ancient: ultimate reality in its most essential form is expressed in sound. Philosophical schools of great sophistication, such as the Sphota school,108 are based on theories of sound and vibration as the essential and basic constituents of reality. Related to this emphasis on the priority of sound as basic to the nature of ultimate reality is the equally ancient emphasis in Hinduism on the potency of mantras, or sacred utterances. Reciting mantras, particularly Vedic mantras, is an essential part of most Hindu rituals. Indeed, many rituals are believed to be impotent unless qualified priests pronounce the mantras correctly. Traditionally, furthermore, only a select group of people, certain Brahmans, knew Vedic mantras and were prohibited from uttering them where they might be heard by unqualified people, such as women or any members of lower castes. Mantras were usually taken from sacred texts, and their power was believed to be almost unlimited; a highcaste male elite guarded them closely.

Similarly in tantric *sadhand, *the mantras that a *sadhaka *receives from his or her guru are secret and regarded as extremely powerful. The mantra of a goddess, for example, is transmitted to a *sddhaka *by a guru secretly in a ritual; the guru has chosen the particular mantra as suitable to the adept. Despite the impression that mantras are public because they are in printed editions of the *tantras *and that one might freely invoke them for their effect, mantras are in fact transmitted by a spiritual master during a carefully supervised spiritual undertaking.





The idea, then, that the ten goddesses who constitute the Mahāvidyās are essentially ten mantras, and that the term *dasamahavidya *may literally mean the "ten great mantras," is understandable. What is also significant is that the goddess—who is the mantra—appears or exists only when the mantra is invoked. She remains in latent form until a particular adept invokes her through the mantra that is her animating essence. It is in this sense, perhaps, that the emphasis upon the adept and the goddess being one might be understood in the tantric context. One cannot and does not exist without the other.

It is difficult, however, to leave the matter of the term *mahavidya **here. *Indeed, several people have commented on the significance of the term without emphasizing, or even mentioning, its reference to the mantras of the ten goddesses. The term *vidya *means "knowledge" and can refer to practical knowledge, knowledge of arts and sciences, or transformative knowledge. The name, then, according to some, is related to the idea that the ten goddesses bestow or reveal certain types of knowledge. One contemporary scholar says: "These \[the Mahāvidyās\] are the representatives of transcendent knowledge and power, the sources of all that is to be known."109 Another scholar refers to the Mahāvidyās as "ten objects of transcendental knowledge . . . signifying the various degrees and stages of existence."110 Another scholar says that the Mahāvidyās are so called because they are the "sources of all that is to be known."111 Yet another scholar maintains that the Mahadevi causes bondage and in this capacity is referred to as *avidya, *but that she also causes liberation and in this capacity is referred to as *vidya. *The ten Mahāvidyās, then, are ten forms in which the goddess brings about enlightenment by means of liberating knowledge.112 * *Yet another scholar equates *vidya *with *sakti, *which, he says, underlies and pervades all things. Indeed, he equates *vidya *with *brahman *itself, ultimate reality. *Vidya, *like *brahman, *is *saccidananda *\(being, consciousness, and bliss\). The Mahāvidyās, then, embody or transmit ultimate power and complete knowledge.113

Each of these interpretations of the term *mahavidya *goes beyond the technical meaning of "mantra" to apply the more encompassing meaning, "knowledge," to the ten goddesses. Viewing the goddesses as those who grant great knowledge or wisdom is in keeping with a general association between goddesses and knowledge throughout *sakta *literature. We find many textual references to goddesses, or the Great Goddess, as identical with, or associated with, knowledge and intellect or other mental attributes related to knowledge and wisdom. In the *DevF-mdhdtmya, *Durga is referred to as Mahavidya twice \(1.58 and 11.21\) and as Vidya \(1.44 and 4.8\). It is clear, furthermore, that her identification with *vidya *in these verses is related to liberating knowledge. Durga is also associated with *buddhi, *"intellect," four times in the *Devi-mahatmya.114 *In the concluding scene of the *Devi-mahatmya, *the goddess grants the merchant Samadhi liberating knowledge *\(video\) *\(13.16\). In the *Brahma-vaivaita**purdna, *Durga is also associated with *buddhi *and is called Buddhirupa, "she whose form is intellect."115 Durga is also identified with *cetand, *"consciousness," in the *Devi-mahatmya *\(5.13\). In the *Mahdbhagavata-purdna, *the goddess is said to be supreme knowledge, *pardvidyd, *and in this form to manifest herself in different goddesses: Gariga, Durga, Savitri, Laksmi, and Sarasvati.116 Several of the epithets included in the *Lalitd-sahas**randma, *a famous goddess hymn, identify the goddess with knowledge and wisdom: Mahabuddhi, "great intelligence" \(no. 2 2 3\), Vijnanabhanarupini, "she whose form is a mass of knowledge" \(no. 253\), Prajnatmika, "she who is wisdom itself" \(no. 261\), Mati, "intelligence" \(no. 445\), Vidya, "knowledge" \(no. 549\), Atmavidya, "knowledge of *dtman *\('self or soul\)" \(no. 583\), Mahavidya, "great knowledge" \(no. 584\), and Canada, "she who bestows knowledge" \(no. 643\).117 The *Devi-bhdga**vata-purdna *frequently refers to the principal goddess of the text as Vidya or Brahmavidya, "the knowledge of *brahman *\(the highest reality\)."118 Perhaps the earliest examples of female beings bearing the name Vidya are found in the *Mahdbhdrata. *A female being named Vidya is mentioned as a member of Parvati's entourage \(3.221.20\), and a group of female beings called the Vidyas are described attending the god Brahma \(2.n.15\).





The connection between the technical meaning of *mahavidya *as "great mantra" and interpretations that emphasize the term as meaning "knowledge" or "wisdom" resides in the tantric belief that mantras awaken consciousness and expand the senses and intellect. The difference is only one of means and ends. Mantras are the means to realizing the goal of knowledge. In this sense, the ten Mahāvidyās are the ten great mantras by means of which knowledge is gained, awakened, or discovered within.




