+++
title = "09 Concluding Observations"

+++

The ten Mahāvidyās form a distinctive group of deities. Although it includes some well-known goddesses, such as Kali and Laksmi, most of them are little known apart from this group, and several of the goddesses are strikingly unusual \(Chinnamasta, Dhumavatl, and Bagalamukhi in particular\). The group does not particularly manifest characteristics and functions that typify *sakta *Hinduism, yet they are often said to represent the Mahadevi in her diverse forms. Several texts and secondary sources imply that they sum up, or circumscribe in some fashion, the main features of the Mahadevl. Nonetheless, the group lacks many features considered central to *sakta *theology and religion.

For example, the group lacks the close association with sacred places that is an important feature of Hindu goddess traditions. Kali, outside the Mahāvidyās, has many famous temples, and at these sacred places she is often connected to the myth of *the **sakta **pithas, *which has a geographical theme. The most famous of such Kali temples is Kalighat \(after which the city of Calcutta is named\). Similarly, apart from the Mahāvidyās, Tara has several important sacred places. Taraplth in Birbhum district of Bengal is perhaps the most famous. Laksmi \(Kamala\) also has many wellknown temples of regional or local importance that tie her to the local culture and land. However, this geographical aspect of Kali, Tara, and Kamala is barely even mentioned in the context of their roles among the Mahāvidyās. The texts that discuss and describe the Mahāvidyās do not seem to be interested in reflecting upon or promoting the ways in which these goddesses are associated with sacred geography in their independent cults. In the same vein, the *sakta **pitha *myth is rarely mentioned, even though in the myth the *pithas *all arise from the body of Sati, who is the origin of the Mahāvidyās in the *puranic *accounts \(see above\). It is also interesting that the Mahāvidyās as a group and individually are rarely associated with such geographical goddesses as Gariga, even though the *Mahabhdgavata-purana *tells the stories of both Gariga and the origin of the Mahāvidyās. It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the meaning and function of the Mahāvidyās are only very weakly related to sacred geography, even though it is often extremely important in the case of other goddesses and goddess cults. To use Diana Eck's expression, the Mahāvidyās, as a group and as individuals, lack a clear "locative aspect," which is a particularly distinctive feature of Hinduism and much Hindu goddess worship.119 The Mahāvidyās have little or no connection with "organic symbols" of the sacred,120 such as mountains, rivers, river banks, or river confluences.





The Mahāvidyās lack another characteristic that typifies many Hindu goddesses. They have little or no connection with motherhood, fecundity, and growth. Although they may have names that connect them with creation in a general way, particularly in their *nama **stotras *\(hymns consisting of names or epithets\), they are not depicted as mothers, and they are rarely referred to by maternal epithets. Similarly, they are only very weakly connected with fecundity and growth, which are important themes in the cults of other goddesses, even in the cults of Kamala and Kali apart from their associations with the Mahavidyas.121 The Mahavidyas are seldom worshiped for progeny or fertility.

Another notable feature of Hindu goddesses is their role as consorts. Many of them are associated with particular gods as wives or consorts. Among the Mahāvidyās this role is extremely weak. They are almost always depicted or described without reference to a consort. Although they may bear epithets in their *nama **stotras *that associate them with a male deity, usually Siva, he is rarely depicted with them, and when he is, he is subordinate to them. For example, Kali and Tara are shown standing on his supine body, and Tripura-sundarl is shown sitting on a throne whose legs are the four male gods \(Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, and Rudra\). Both as a group and as individual goddesses within the group, the Mahāvidyās are independent. It is particularly striking in the case of Kamala, who is otherwise known to be Visnu's consort, that he is not depicted with her when she is shown as one of the Mahāvidyās. Her *dhydna *mantra describes her without him, preferring the very ancient image of Gaja-laksmi, in which she is flanked by elephants showering her with water from their trunks or from pots. It is not her wifely associations and functions that are significant in her role as a Mahavidya.

The function of the Mahāvidyās in maintaining cosmic order, dharma, is also weak. For many goddesses, particularly the demon-slaying Durga, their role as guardian and maintainer of dharma is central. As we have discussed above, the Mahadevi's assumption of appropriate forms to defeat demons and maintain cosmic balance and harmony is an important facet *oisakta *theology in many texts. Indeed, the Mahāvidyās are sometimes compared to the *avataras *of Vishnu, or the *avataras *are said to be identical with or to have arisen from the Mahāvidyās. Their *name **stotras *also give individual Mahāvidyās epithets that suggest a world-maintaining role. Their iconography and mythology, however, do not emphasize it, for the Mahāvidyās as a group or as individuals.

Although the Mahāvidyās are not strongly associated with geographical features or maternal, consort, or dharma-upholding functions, they do have other characteristics that might help us begin to understand their distinctive nature as a group and as individual goddesses. The Mahāvidyās are independent deities, having only a weak connection with a male deity. In the case of individual Mahavidya who are known to be consorts of male deities outside the context of the Mahavidya cult, such as Kali, Tara, and Kamala, this association is played down or ignored when they are approached as Mahāvidyās. Even the origin myth of the Mahāvidyās, though featuring Sati, Siva's wife, stresses her decision to act independently of her husband and her success in bending him to her will. When the Mahāvidyās as individuals are shown with a male consort, they dominate him, standing on his supine body, assuming the "superior" position in sexual intercourse, or sitting on a throne or couch supported by male deities. In short, where male deities do appear, they are subordinate and subservient to the Mahāvidyās.





The Mahāvidyās, with a few exceptions, are fearsome. They dwell or are worshiped in cremation grounds, sit on corpses, wear garlands of severed heads or skulls, are naked and smeared with blood, and have disheveled hair. They tend to be rough, not soft, in nature. This fierce aspect overshadows their boon-conferring, indulgent nature.

In the context of Tantrism, and in terms of many of their names, they are associated with *sadhana *\(spiritual exercises\). They are associated also with mental and psychic powers *\(siddhis\) *and heightened states of consciousness.

Finally, they are associated with mantras. They are mantras, they exist where their mantras are uttered, and their most essential form is as mantras. They are, unquestionably, powerful sounds. In this respect, they are tied inextricably to human beings, without whom they would remain only latent. It is when a *sadhaka *invokes the mantra of a goddess that she "comes alive." The Mahāvidyās, that is, as mantras, represent or symbolize aspects of awareness, consciousness, or mental capacity associated with mantra *sadhana *\(spiritual discipline that employs sacred sounds\). In a sense we could say that each Mahavidya represents a style of spirituality appropriate to the *sadhaka *as determined by the guru who has bequeathed to him or her a special mantra, that is, a special goddess.

Next we will turn our attention to the individual Mahāvidyās. We will often find ideas and themes that apply to the Mahāvidyās as a group being reiterated and emphasized in the iconography and mythology of a particular goddess. On the other hand, each goddess also has her peculiarities: unique features that are only weakly stressed in the group as a whole.



