+++
title = "01 Disease-Producing Spirit Possession"

+++
The Caraka-Saṃhitā, the oldest of the major āyurvedic texts,1 mentions three kinds of therapy (cikitsā): daivavyapāśraya (spiritual), yuktivyapāśraya (rational), and sattvāvajaya (psychological).2 Regardless of readily available (and well-known) definitions of these terms in canonical āyurvedic texts, practicing physicians most often quote the following Sanskrit verse as a prelude to any discussion of the treatment of mental illness, including those diagnosed as caused or exacerbated by spirit possession:

janmāntarakṛtam pāpaṃ vyādhirūpeṇa jāyate |  
tacchāntair aushadhaiḥ dānaiḥ japahomārcanādibhiḥ ||  
When it takes the form of disease, a moral transgression effected in another birth may be overcome through rituals of pacification [śānta], medicines [auṣadha], gift giving [dāna], repetition of the name of god [japa], fire offerings [homa], temple offerings [arcana], etc.3

PLATE 11. An astrologer’s shop, Bombay, 1947.  
Henri Cartier-Bresson. Reprinted with permission of Magnum Photos. All rights reserved.

This verse is used conventionally to explain daivavyapāśrayacikitsā (treatment based on daiva or fate, “spiritual” treatment employed to alleviate the effects of karma or actions performed in past births).4 Although a detailed discussion of the specifics of daivavyapāśraya- (and yuktivyapāśraya-) cikitsā is given later in this chapter,5 the verse, for us too, is a window into the general subject of mental illness, specifically disease-producing spirit possession.

This chapter is organized around the general theme of bhūtavidyā, the vidyā (science) of bhūtas (existent beings),6 most of which are invisible or assumed to be inhabiting other beings, the most important of which is humans, and are believed to cause various diseases, including certain forms of mental illness. This is a vast subject in India, but the present discussion examines only a few of the many texts within a surprising number of genres in which this is delineated. These include the Atharvaveda (AV) and its ancillary texts, the first millennium C.E. canonical āyurvedic texs, certain Tantras and dharmaśāstra texts, and texts otherwise regarded as philosophical. In Chapter 6, we examined a bhūtavidyā section from the Mahābhārata (MBh, 3.216–219). This is augmented in the present material. After discussions and translations of the key passages in the early āyurvedic texts and a complementary passage in the Sāṃkhyakārikā, we discuss certain modern interpretations of the āyurvedic passages, employing an important early Tibetan medical text as a counterpoint. Then we expand the discussion to include material on bhūtavidyā from the tantric and dharmasastra texts, as well as from a few contemporary ethnographies. The primary purpose of this examination, as of much of the remaining parts of the chapter, is to illustrate that India has a long history of viewing disease-producing spirit possession in moral terms: that behavior, viewed within a framework of moral concern, is a major component in the diagnosis of mental illness, more specifically in the diagnosis of spirit possession.7 Along the way it is necessary to discuss at length terms used for certain important possessors, in particular the graha and the piśāca. The chapter closes with discussions of diagnosis and treatment, drawn from both classical āyurvedic texts and contemporary practice, which do not always coincide. It would be a mistake to assume that the āyurvedic texts and traditions are invariable, unchanging, in agreement, or applied consistently in practice. Indeed, in response to changing cultural and intellectual practices, these traditions increasingly embraced elements of Tantra, dharmasāstra, and unclassified local practices, producing a mosaic around bhūtavidyā that, like so much of Indian praxis, leaves everything different, yet somehow the same.

Because possession was widely regarded as an affliction, whether for good or ill, it was medicalized very early. Āyurvedic texts of all periods locate possession within a category of pathology called unmāda (madness), though it is commonly known in āyurvedic circles more sanguinely as mānasika-roga (mental illness). Within that category, possession is regarded as an affliction that enters a person from outside, a condition with “exogenous” (āgantuka) causes,8 beyond the scope of identifiable medical or social pathology. In this way, it was regarded as suffering of divine origin (adhidaivika duḥkha), “effected by providential causes or acts of the gods, that is, factors that are beyond human control.”9 This view is expressed consistently from the early compendia of Caraka, Susruta, and Vāgbhaṭa, through the later commentaries and independent āyurvedic treatises of the mid- to late second millennium.

Complementary to this viewpoint, a theoretical system of bhūtavidyā developed. This was not a static concept, and, as we shall see, it went through significant changes over time, eventually becoming, more plainly, a demonology in which increasingly feral or bluntly amoral nonhuman beings were identified and classified. This helped foster an environment of spirit healing that was characterized by a great variation in pharmacological, ritual, and social modalities, many of which we discuss here.
