+++
title = "05 Piśācas and the Piśācmocan Temple"

+++
Because of the ubiquity of the piśāca, a few words must be said about it. An illuminating passage appears in the Nīlamata Purāṇa (NP), a text from Kashmir that depicts a social and spiritual universe densely populated with ethereal beings of nearly unimaginable variety, which readily interact with one another as well as with humans. These beings comprise devas, gandharvas, apsarases, yakṣas, guhyakas, kinnaras, nāgas, rākṣasas, piśācas, and millions of others.181 Pisācas enjoy an honored place in this pantheon. They roam the heavens and the earth, including the rivers, mountains, towns, and forests of Kashmir. Indeed, the geography of Kashmir is vividly portrayed, rendering this Purāṇa a valuable source of historical knowledge. It is also a handbook of popular festivals and astrologically based rituals. Although recent efforts have been made to historicize the NP, much work remains to be done.

The NP depicts gargantuan battles between hordes of these beings. NP 210ff. tells of piśācas in the employ of the gods. These piśācas are under the direct command of the piśāca lord Nikumbha, who has been hired by the god Kubera, himself commanded by Viṣṇu. These piśācas, numbering fifty million, are hired guns for the good guys and, therefore, themselves in some sense good, because they are allied with Viṣṇu.182 Their job is to battle an equally voluminous number of malevolent piśācas on calendrically regulated dates. In spite of their affiliation with Kubera and Viṣṇu, however, they remain dangerous to humans, thus deserving of their offerings. In one passage the goddess asks the sage Kaśyapa why she should attend to Kashmir, since it constitutes her very body, when there is more important work elsewhere. Kaśyapa replies that in Kashmir humans are always associated with piśācas, so she needs to see that their minds do not become perverted because of this association. Despite the watchful eye of the goddess, the NP (397–410) describes a highly transgressive festival in which humans become possessed by these good piśācas and appear to enjoy themselves immensely. Whether this constitutes defilement or perversion, or whether this matters, is undetermined.

The text of the NP has no clear divisions or properly marked narrative transitions. It moves in stream-of-consciousness fashion from the middle of one topic to the middle of another. Nevertheless, with respect to our story, we may surmise that, beginning on the full moon of the month of Asvina (mid-October), the celebrants should worship brahmans, honor their own ātman (probably indicating some form of meditation, mantra recitation, or brief ritual practice), then enjoy a vegetarian banquet and an evening concert or dramatic performance. On the following two days, they should bathe as usual in the morning, then attire themselves finely and perform appropriate fire rituals. The remainder of these two days should be spent relaxing in the company of friends. After the morning rituals, in contravention of the usual dictum not to engage in sexual activity during the daytime, the celebrants, followers (anuyāyinaḥ) of the good piśāca Nikumbha, should smear their bodies and those of their friends with mud, then engage in revelry and well-turned lascivious speech that is both sexually enticing and arousing (talliṇgārthaprabodhakaiḥ [brings about an erection]). They should shout vulgar words and cavort about. At that time, they become possessed by frightful-looking piśācas—the ones who work for Kubera, we later learn. In the late afternoon or evening, after the celebrants bathe once again, these piśācas exit the bodies of those who have properly engaged in this ritual and enter and curse those who have not. Then those followers of Nikumbha should worship Kesava. Afterward, they should keep an oil lamp lit outside their houses for one month, until the full moon of the month of Kārttika and observe certain ritual vows for six months.

It is not clear how much of this is protest, redemption, escape, or just good clean sybaritic and festive fun. It is possible that the sectarian and political history of Kashmir had an impact on this ritual, but this has not been researched. It is also not clear to what degree this mud-wrestling possession orgy has been reframed or fictionalized by the NP. I know of no equivalent ritual in modern-day India, though it is possible, even probable, that other sexual rituals, such as the tantric cakrapūjā, at one time had variants in which the dramatis personae became possessed by the goddesses of the cakra before engaging in ritual sex.183 We can also posit that the possession in this ritual was protective as well as transgressive, the ritual possession being the safety net that thwarted adharma. As a ritual mechanism, this possession shifted the onus of transgressive sex from dharmically conscientious citizens to liminally relocated and reconstituted personalities. Although the sexual aspect does not, to the best of my knowledge, appear in modern possession ritual, group possession ritual is often documented in India, for example, in the Draupadī festival in Tamilnadu and the Siri festival in the South Kanara District of Karnataka.

Pollock’s remarks on the genesis and role of the rākṣasa are apposite here. He cites the Rāmāyaṇa to the effect that the concerns of rākṣasas are “to master the sports of lovemaking and hold crowded fairs and festivals.”184 Their pursuit of lovemaking can be traced back to the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and their powers of transformation to the ṚV.185 Pollock argues that rākṣasas are “the imaginative product of the confrontation of traditional Indians with their particular forms of desire—in its two primary forms, libidinal and aggressive—representing all that traditional Indians most desired and most feared.… [I]n their libidinized forms, they enact the deepest sexual urges—total abandonment to pleasure, as well as absolute autonomy and power in gratifying lust.”186 This verdict applies as well to the piśācas in the NP, where ritual both domesticates and liberates them, providing their hosts an opportunity to release their pent-up sexual aggression in a context that not only does not threaten to corrupt or overturn established cultural standards but, through that context—namely, the ritual—reinforces them. This, then, is a ritual of reversal—in this case, reversing an established expectation of monogamy—and is rather like certain other rituals of reversal in North Indian festivals. What comes immediately to mind is the day during the spring festival of Holi on which the women of certain villages in Braj (e.g., Nandagaon, Gokul) beat their husbands and other men, immune, that day, from reciprocation.187

The piśācas of the NP, at least the good ones, differ radically from the malevolent piśācas depicted in the āyurvedic and tantric texts cited above, where they are described as impure, dirty, desolate, restless, incapable of enjoyment, and so on.188 The latter piśācas are ever threatening and require ritual expiation. A specific venue for such expiation, the Skanda Purāṇa informs us, is a certain Pāsupata Śaiva temple called Pisācamocana in Varanasi.189 It is here, so the story goes, that once long ago, during the tretayuga, a great-souled ascetic named Vālmīki performed brahmanical rituals before the Kapardīśa liṇga, then sat for meditation on the banks of a nearby lake. He saw there a ghastly and miserable rākṣasa who described to him how he attained that sorry state. While alive he was a brahman temple priest in far-off Pratiṣṭhāna on the banks of the Godavari river, and while performing his priestly duties he accepted gifts from pilgrims (tīrtha-pratigraha), but kept them all, failing to donate any of them to the temple. For this he was condemned to exist as a piśāca. One day, while he was floating as a piśāca in Pratiṣṭhāna, a young brahman passed by. He failed to perform his sandhyā rites and did not purify himself properly after urinating and defecating. Like Kali possessing Nala, this piśāca passed into the body of this brahman boy (taccharīre ’haṃ saṃkrāntaḥ). Eventually that brahman made his way to Varanasi, for business rather than pilgrimage, but the ethereal guardians of the holy city refused to allow him into the inner shrine area (antargeha) without expunging him of his sins, along with the invasive piśāca, at least temporarily, both of which would reenter him when he left. So, the piśāca was stranded in the outer neighborhoods without a host. Just as it was about to seize and eat a healthy pilgrim, the latter uttered the name of Śiva, purifying the piśāca, which then followed the pilgrim to the Kapardīśa liṇga. There he was noticed by the ascetic Vālmīki, who gave him a small quantity of sanctified ash (bhasma, vibhūti) from his fire to apply to his forehead. This was sufficient to purify the piśāca to the point that it could be admitted for bathing in the sacred pond. As a result, the piśāca lost its frightful qualities and attained a divine body (divyadeham).

The Pisācmocan temple continues as a venue for exorcism. Two types of officiant serve those in need: the bhagat, who invokes the deity in charge of the exorcism, and the ojhā, who actually performs the exorcism. The important elements of the exorcism are, first, ritual procedure and, second, speech, which at Pisācmocan and elsewhere in Varanasi includes mantra and secret language. Among the substances employed are cloves, which, given to the client, serve to transport the pret away from the body, while lemons and sometimes rice-flour balls (piṇḍa) are used for bali or simple sacrificial offerings to the deity. Thus, the spirit, often that of an ancestor (pitṛ), is pacified, after which it is seated (baiṭhnā) in the temple, where the deity is deemed strong enough to hold it forever. Occasionally, the client will drive a nail into the trunk of a large tree on the temple grounds, fixing the offending spirit to it. It is important to note that the prevailing viewpoint is that the spirit rides or sits on the individual, not inside the person.

Many ojhās who frequent Pisācmocan are from or are connected with outlying villages. They bring their clients to Pisācmocan after working with them for lengthy periods, sometimes for years. Many of the clients are women who have suffered a miscarriage, influenced by the notion that an evil spirit has been sent by an enemy. Others are men—often brothers—enmeshed in legal disputes, believing that they have been cursed by spirits sent by the opposing party through hired tantrics. Many more are relatives of people who have died suddenly, a condition that is said to render the subtle body of the deceased vulnerable to possession by nasty spirits.190 Most of the traffic at Pisācmocan, however, is for fairly ordinary postmortem rites (srāddha, piṇḍadāna). This is performed throughout the year, though preponderantly during pitṛpakṣa, the fortnight of the waning moon in the month of Bhādrapad (usually mid- to late September). This serves the dual purpose of feeding the ancestors, the usual intent, and exorcising them of evil spirits, just in case.


PLATE 12. Pisac Baba, Pisacmocan Temple, Varanasi.  
Photo by the author, 2001.
