+++
title = "11 NOTES"

+++
1. The composition was cumulative, dating from the second or third century B.C.E. to the fourth or fifth century of the Common Era. For a summary of the evidence see Wujastyk 1998:39–41. For a more precise dating of the core of the text to 50–150 C.E. and exhaustive evidence for this date, see Meulenbeld HIML IA:105–115 and references.
2. Caraka-sūtrasthāna (CaSu) 11.54, Caraka-vimānasthāna (CaVi) 8.87; also Aṣṭāṇgasaṃgraha-sūtrasthāna (ASaṃSū) 12.3; and Hārītasaṃhitā 3.2.3 for variants daivapathāśraya and yuktipathāsraya. On the word sattvāvajaya, see Murthy and Singh 1987, Shankar and Unnikrishnan 2004:168, and note 221 below.
3. None of my informants knew the textual source of this verse, and I am unable to trace it. However, for a number of similar passages in Purāṇas and Smṛtis see Thite 1982:17–18. One vaidya told me that it is from a karmavipākaprāyascitta, or section on “expiation of ripened karma,” found in various Tantras and Dharmasastra texts. For more on karmavipāka, see the discussion below on the Madanamahārṇava.
4. Daiva, lit. “divine,” from deva, “deity,” has the extended (and usual) meaning “fate.” See CaSā 1.116: “Action that a person performs in a previous body is known as daiva. In time this also becomes the cause of diseases”; also CaSā 2.44: “That which is done in a previous birth is called daiva, while whatever action [karma] is seen in the present birth is called pauruṣa. That which is seen to be unbalanced is the cause of the onset [of disease], while that same thing brought into balance is the cause of its cessation.” Thus, daiva is contrasted with pauruṣa (human), from puruṣa (man or person); cf. CaVi 3.33–34.
5. Scant mention is made of sattvāvajaya, following the āyurvedic texts themselves.
6. Engler 2003:438 translates this as “science of demonic seizures.” This is a misunderstanding of the term.
7. See Kleinman and Seeman (1998:237–252), who show, through comparative analysis, that religious healing is a form of moral practice. They write: “Calculations of locally defined utility, construction of self and cosmology, and the micro-politics of local social life are all central to healing as moral practice” (p. 251). This assertion is abundantly supported by the āyurvedic and folk texts and practices presented in this chapter.
8. For example, CaCi 9.33:93–94. Zysk (1985:63) translates this as “accidental” and distinguishes it from madness caused by external agents such as gods, sages, deceased ancestors, and a variety of demons. My reading is that the latter are the primary agents of āgantuka unmāda. Zysk states the general theme as follows:
   Causes of diseases are not attributed to physiological functions, but rather to external beings or forces of a demonic nature who enter the body of their victim and produce sickness. The removal of such malevolent entities usually involved an elaborate ritual, often drawing on aspects of the dominant local religion and nearly always necessitating spiritually potent and efficacious words, actions and devices.… The Vedic Indian’s attitude toward disease, therefore, was dominated by the belief that evil spirits, demons and other malevolent forces invade the body and caused their victims to exhibit a state of dis-ease. (p. 8)
   See Zysk 1991:15 for another similar assertion.
9. Dash and Kashyap 1980:1. These authors, following Ṭoḍarānanda (hence the intellectual lineage of Susruta), divide Āyurveda into ādhyātmika duḥkha (śārīraka and mānasika), ādhibhautika duḥkha, and ādhidaivika duḥkha, employing familiar Indic hermeneutical categories.
10. For convenient summaries see, e.g., Keith 1925:231–242; Oldenberg 1988:131–134. Bhattacharyya 2000 supplies much more detail in his diffuse and irregularly documented study of bhūtavidya; see esp. ch. 2 on “Vedic Demonology.” I cannot here enter into all the detail Bhattacharyya discusses, because the nature of the present project is to discuss only those bhūtas that are involved in possession, rather than all manner of vedic bhūtas.
11. Cf. also Chāndogya Upaniṣad (ChU) 7.1.4, 7.2.1, 7.7.1. The best accounts of bhūtavidya are Filliozat 1937 and Sukla 1985. Filliozat’s remarkable work provides a succinct introduction to the topic (p. 24–28) and tracks bhūtas through a stunning array of texts, languages, and cultures. Sukla contains more data than anyone else, except Bhattacharya 2000, but he organizes it much more effectively. I do not here address postcolonial interpretations or what Langford calls the “narrative of decline,” in which Āyurveda has been subjected to a secularization process. As part of this narrative, bhūtavidya has been regarded by many indigenous scholars and physicians dedicated to discovering modern science in ancient knowledge as superstition or psychotherapy, and bhūtas as microorganisms such as fungi, bacteria, and viruses; see Langford 2002:85ff. and notes.
12. Cf. Śāṇkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra (GS) 4.9.3, Asvalāyana GS 3.4.2; cf. also Pāraskara GS 2.12.2.
13. Dhaky 1984:240. His interpretations are often far-fetched, but he may be right to take bhūtas back to their roots in the elements, the bhūtas or mahabhūtas. He posits bhūtas as “elementals” and bhūtanāyakas as “captains of the elementals.” Cf. MBh 9.44.74–108; Matsyapurāṇa 53.1–46, 182.64–66, for physical features and other details of gaṇas, gaṇanāyakas, and gaṇeśvaras. The elements—earth, water, light, air, sky—have bhūtas and gaṇas (clans or tribes of the divine retinue) as their representatives, their symbols of noumenal and phenomenal reality.
14. yás ta ūr viháraty antar dámpatī śáye | yóniṃ yó antár āréṭhi tām itó nāsayāmasi || (He who opens your thighs, who lies between husband and wife, who licks inside the womb; him do we cast away from here). On 10.162.4c, see Sāyaṇa’s commentary, yonim antaḥ praviśya āreḷhi niṣiktaṃ reto jihvayā āsvādayati, bhakṣayatīty arthaḥ. See Sharma 1972:99; also Zysk’s perspicacious rendering, 1985:51–53.
15. Mayaram 2001:215. See also, notably, Taussig 1987.
16. For example, the case of Indra, the king of the gods, who becomes disfigured and degraded because of his untoward sexual advances on respectable women, or Śiva, who destroys Dakṣa’s sacrifice because of his exclusion.
17. Cf. AVŚ 3.11.1, 20.96.6. On yákṣma, see Bahulkar 1994:129f.; Filliozat 1964:43f., 96; Zysk 1985:12–17.
18. On the pravargya, see van Buitenen 1968; Houben 2000.
19. Āpastamba ŚS 15.19.4; Bhāradvāja ŚS 11.19.12; cf. Baudhāyana GS 3.7.27,28.
20. Āyurveda is often considered an upāṇga or upaveda of the AV; cf. e.g., Sukla 1985, in Sanskrit, intro. p. 10; cf. e.g., Aṣṭāṇgahṛdaya Saṃhitā (AH) 5.84; Aṣṭāṇgasaṃgraha (ASam) 7.118cd: daivavyāpāśrayaṃ tadvad atharvoktaṃ ca pūjitam. However, Wujastyk notes, “such medical material as is recoverable from the Vedic literature is remarkable more for its differences from classical āyurveda than for its similarities.… Of course there are some points of contact, but the overall sense is that, culturally speaking, āyurveda comes from somewhere else” (1998:17). Wujastyk’s translation of this chapter of the AH (ibid.:294–301) is the clearest exposition of its kind yet published. See also Meulenbeld: “In my opinion, Caraka’s list of sages, many of whom are known from Vedic literature, may have been inserted in order to stress the connection between āyurveda and the Vedic tradition, the orthodoxy of its teachings, and its association with the brāhmaṇa” (HIML IA:10).
21. See also the commentary by Sāyaṇa, cited in Whitney 1905:1:17.
22. Cf. Kausikasūtra 28.9 for a linked remedial rite against possession by evil spirits. The commentary on the KausSū explains that this rite is a mahāsānti called gāndharvī; cf. Bahulkar 1994:159f.; Whitney 1905:I:211.
23. See Zysk 1985:52 and, especially, Bahulkar 1994:126f. for the ritual and pharmacological prescriptions of the KausSū and the commentary of Dārila, as well as a summary of scholarly opinions on the hymn. The hymn itself, AVŚ 2.25, is addressed to a pṛśniparṇ, a “spotted leafed” plant, which was used to help redress the condition.
24. agna … sa gráhyāḥ pśān vi cṛta prajānán. Cf. Bloomfield 1894:cxix ff., 1897:521 ff.
25. This is a much recognized and discussed aspect of healing traditions in ancient India. See, e.g., Bahulkar 1994 and Zysk 1985 for extensive discussions of this.
26. Beyer (1973:100) describes a Tibetan ritual in which the yogin makes a wax effigy into which he subjugates an enemy—a king or a demon are mentioned—by visualizing and bringing it into the effigy, which he then torments over flames and tramples.
27. Shukla 1980:135ff. and infra.
28. Zysk 1985:62.
29. Ibid.:63, Sanskrit words added.
30. Cf. AH 6.6.55cd: “One should examine the patient for supernatural possession. The signs which were earlier described as applying to madness appear exaggerated” (trans. in Wujastyk 1998:301).
31. Sanderson 1985:213n89.
32. Ibid.:200.
33. Ibid.:211n69.
34. Ibid.:211–212n69, abhiniveśam is translated as “obsession.” Sanderson notes a further symbolic or, from the Indian point of view, adhyātmika reading in Jayaratha’s commentary.
35. Bahulkar 1994:160; his translation of amati- is “unconsciousness,” but this does not quite fit the context.
36. Weiss 1977. This remains unpublished, though the author is now preparing it for publication. For a comprehensive bibliography of works on unmāda, see Meulenbeld, HIML IB:65n93.
37. Cf. Weiss: “The object of the present study is to gain an understanding of the psychiatric conceptual formulations of the early Indian medical authors in the light of Western nosology, and our interest in therapeutics is limited to the extent to which it serves to elucidate the diagnostic categories” (1977:3).
38. Meulenbeld 1997:186–198.
39. One of the primary alleged causes of abhiṣaṅgaja disease is abhicāra (cf. Türstig 1985); that is, a bhūta that “sticks to” (abhiṣaṅga) a person is regarded as abhicāraja, sent by a hired sorcerer to possess the person. Cf. Dwyer 1998 and Chapter 4, note 35, and above p. 517f.
40. Lewis 1966:308 (reprint 1986:24).
41. Sanskrit lexicographers also acknowledge bhūtāveśa; cf. Trikāṇḍaśeṣa 3.230 and Hemacandra’s Anekārthasaṃgraha 4.161. The Rasaratnasamuccaya (5.2, 6.7), a thirteenth-century medical text prescribes a bhūtāveśapraśānti (procedure for pacifying possession by bhūtas). For further attestations of bhūtāveśa and piśācāveśa (and variants), see Kalhaṇa’s Rājataraṅgiṇī (c. 1150) 8.114.6 and the late dramas Vasantatilaka (c. 1800) 25.19 and Amṛtodaya (1710) 3.7, 3.18. Synonymous with āveśa is upahata (struck, afflicted); thus, also attested in the lexicons are bhūtopahata (afflicted by bhūtas); bhūtopahatacitta (the mind possessed by bhūtas); and, of course, the antidote, assuming the former: bhūtapratiṣedha (warding off bhūtas).
42. Other texts, many of them now lost, existed in both periods. See Meulenbeld HIML IA:689ff. (and notes), for a discussion of ancient authorities cited by Caraka, Susruta, Vāgbhaṭa, and their commentators, and HIML IIA:117–55 (and notes) for discussion of a number of other texts from the seventh to the eleventh centuries.
43. Meulenbeld (HIML IA:42) calls them “character types,” which is more accurate than “mental faculty,” “psyche,” etc., used by other translators. For discussions of the category sattva, see the many sources cited in Meulenbeld HIML IIB:82n112.
44. Cf. CaSā 4.36–39, SuSā 4.88–98, Kāsyapa 28.8–36.
45. For additional details, see Caraka Saṃhitā, ed. Sharma and Dash:3:416–420.
46. Cf. also Śārṅgdhara Saṃhitā (composed around the beginning of the fourteenth century) 1.7.38. Meulenbeld states that this expansion represents an “incorporation of material from popular medical lore” (1997:189).
47. Thanks to Robert Svoboda, a trained āyurvedic doctor, for this information. On the relationship between bhūtas and apasmāra described in different āyurvedic texts, see Meulenbeld 1997:212–215.
48. āveśo grahaduḥkādyair apasmāro yathāvidhiḥ bhūpātakampaprasvedalālāphenodgmādayaḥ (4.31); for references in other texts on poetics and dramaturgy see Haas 1912:119.
49. Cited in Sabdakalpadruma.
50. This is discussed in the Cidambara Māhāytma, a text describing the greatness of the Naṭarāja (Śiva) temple in Chidambaram, Tamilnadu; cf. David Smith 1996:222ff.
51. I present my own translations because I find that I differ with Weiss 1997 in a significant number of places.
52. In a rather different vein, see AVŚ 5.4 and commentaries, in which hrūḍu, the secret name of the graha, is uttered to appease the spirit in charge of giving consumption (yákṣma) or fever (takmán); cf. Zysk 1985:53.
53. One word for “comet” is upagraha; cf. MBh 3.216.1.
54. For a good brief synopsis of the evolution of the application of the word graha to the planets, see Yano 2003:380ff.
55. Cf AVŚ 19.9.7,10. See Caland 1926. Verse 10 reads: śáṃ no gráhāś cāndramas śáṃ ādityś ca rāhúnā | śáṃ no mṛtyúr dhūmaketúḥ śáṃ rudrs tigmatejasaḥ || (Weal for us be the planets belonging to the moon, and weal the sun with Rāhu; weal for us smoke-bannered death, weal the Rudras of keen brightness) (trans. Whitney 1905:2:914).
56. Bṛhatsaṃhitā 5.11; BṛS 5.13 reads uparāga (darkening) for eclipse; cf. also Bhāgavata Purāna (BhP) 5.24.3.
57. I am not able to find the words āveśa or praveśa in these contexts to indicate the sun or moon becoming possessed by Rāhu or Ketu (or vice versa). Rather, these two grahas assail (abhidhāvati, BhP 8.9.26, Rāhu only) or devour (grasati, MBh 1.17.8, again only Rāhu) their quarry, rather than “enter” or “possess” them. For references and discussion see, e.g., Bedekar 1967; O’Flaherty 1975:273–280. Although the word ketú is found as early as AVŚ 19.9.8–10, where the word appears to mean “comet,” its reconfiguration as the descending node of the moon occurs only in the early second millennium C.E.; cf. Gail 1980.
58. This is consistent with the use of √gṛh in BĀU 3.3.1, 3.7.1 described above.
59. For example, Bṛhatsaṃhitā 43.37. Cf. Bṛhatparāśara 84.17–20; Kane HDh II:749 ff.; Gaur 1979; Karmaṭhaguruḥ 74ff., 110ff. In the Purāṇas, see, e.g., Matsya Purāna 17.56, 24.46, 93.2ff., instructions for a grahahoma. On the growing importance of astrology in India during the first millennium C.E., see Inden 1992.
60. Cf. Kātyāyana Śrautasūtra 9.14.14, Āśvalāyana Śrautasūtra 8.1.10.
61. Palsule 1967:11. On avatāra, see note 141 below.
62. Ibid.:13.
63. Lutgendorf 1991:250, 322. See also Eck 1985:38.
64. Cf. Bennett 1993.
65. On its Tamil synonym aruḷ, see Chapter 4, p. 128.
66. Cf. ṚV 7.103.4 (anugṛbhṇāti), where frogs kindly receive one another; 2.28.6 (anugṛbhāya), in which the supplicant implores Varuṇa to accept or extend his grace to him. Cf. Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā 25.8, AB 7.18.
67. For dating, see Olivelle 1992:8ff.
68. manyamānau ca kaumāraṃ puṣpitaṃ tadanugraham (KSS 1.2.76).
69. Devasenapathy 1983:10–11. Upadhyaya and Upadhyaya 1984:7 (cf. Honko 1998:251) speak of nigraha and anugraha in Tulunad, meaning the protective and punitive activities, respectively, of different spirits. Honko notes that the Siri epic was performed at possession rituals that were similar to bhūta rituals “with the purpose of supporting the mental health of participants with a history of illness” (p. 261).
70. On this, see Zysk 1993.
71. Eventually Āyurveda was used to confirm Sāṃkhya. The Sāṃkhyasaptativṛtti, an early commentary on the Sāṃkhyasaptati of perhaps the sixth century, uses examples from Āyurveda to support its arguments. See Larson and Bhattacharya 1987:193ff.
72. For these lists, and accompanying discussions, see ibid.:59~61, 161, 177, 206, 284. Larson’s speculations linking the eight realms of the SK to the eightfold prakṛti (p. 61) are thought provoking, but entirely lacking in textual support.
73. For the use of some of these categories in the Mālinīvijayottaratantra, see Vasudeva (2004:326).
74. Cakrapāṇidatta glosses abhidharṣaṇam as āveśaḥ and niyamavratādi as niyamety ādinā aihikaṃ karma devādyāveśakāraṇaṃ brute (by niyama, etc., worldly action caused by possession [āvesa] by gods and others is indicated). The term niyamavratādi may be a reference to Yogasūtras 2.30–32. In these sūtras the five yamas ([external] restraints) (YS 2.30)—non-injury, truthfulness, abstaining from theft, sexual continence, non-covetousness—are called mahāvrata (the great vow) (YS 2.31). The niyamas ([internal] restraints) listed (YS 1.32) are cleanliness, contentment, austerity, studiousness, and devotion to Īśvara. Āyurveda and Yoga have long claimed a connection, but hitherto it has been difficult to actually find textual connections between the two, especially for the early periods. However, a sixteenth-century text called Ayurvedasūtra, which closely links the two, was published in 1994. This late, and rather labored, sutra collection contains within it the entire text of the YS, interspersed with material drawn from āyurvedic texts. Whereas it is fairly certain that Caraka predated YS by several centuries, it may be assumed that many elements of the YS were well known long before the final compilation of the sūtra text. Thus, there is no reason that the yamas and niyamas, as well as other elements of the eightfold (aṣṭāṅga) path, which were quickly incorporated into yogaśāstra and may be found in Buddhist texts, could not have been known to Agnivesa or other compilers of the Caraka Saṃhitā.
75. This verse is adopted as a basic definition of possession in many later texts; cf, e.g., Mādhavanidānam 20.17.
76. On the evolution of the pitṛ in Indic thought, especially in the Harivaṃśa, see Saindon 1995.
77. One wonders about the models on which some of these categories are based. Mozart, it is reported, would suddenly burst out laughing in the middle of a conversation, jump up and down, turn somersaults, and impulsively leap over tables and chairs.
78. Often the texts do not distinguish between waxing and waning fortnights. We must assume that both fortnights are assumed unless otherwise specified.
79. Ḍalhaṇa: bhinnamaryādaṃ tyaktocitakramam abhakṣyabhakṣaṇe agamyāgamane; abandonment of propriety, such as eating what should not be eaten or going where one should not go.
80. Ḍalhaṇa: sṛkkiṇyau oṣṭhaprāntau.
81. Ḍalhaṇa: uddhasto vikṛtadarśanaḥ (deformed or disfigured). Verses 8, 9, 13, 15, and 16 contain the word juṣṭaḥ (pleased, welcomed, visited). This is a rather milder and more positive manner of speaking than Caraka’s equivalent verses: unmattaṃ vidyāt. Verses 10 and 11 read, for “possession,” paripīḍitaḥ; verse 12 reads abhibhūtaḥ; and verse 14 gṛhītaḥ.
82. Ḍalhaṇa: adriḥ parvataḥ, dvirado (two-tusked) hastī, nago (non-moving) vṛkṣaḥ.
83. After Ḍalhaṇa, who cites the variant reading vardhakena rather than vardhakena: vardhakena chedakena hiṃsārthinā kenacid graheṇa juṣṭo gṛhīta iti vyākhyānayanti.
84. This apparently general description could also be an indication of oracular possession, which we have seen from the account of Pātañcala Kāpya and his daughter in the BĀU, was well known by then.
85. Ḍalhaṇa: the eight attributes (guṇāḥ) are the eight siddhis: aṇimā (minification), laghimā (lightness), mahimā (physical expansion), garimā (heaviness), prāptiḥ (instant acquisition), prākāmyam (irresistable will), īśitvam (lordliness), vaśitvam (power of influence). Ḍalhaṇa also cites CaŚā 1.140, which has a different list: āveśaś cetaso jñānam arthānāṃ chandataḥ [or ca svataḥ] kriyā | dṛṣṭiḥ śrotraṃ smṛtiḥ kāntir iṣṭataś cāpy adarśanam-ity aṣṭavidham aiśvaryam āhuḥ | (Possession [āveśa] of [another’s] mind, knowledge of objects according to one’s will, and [the powers of] action, vision, hearing, memory, beauty, and invisibility, all gained in accordance with one’s desire, these, they say, are the eight kinds of majesty). Ḍalhaṇa glosses vyastaḥ as dvitricaturaḥ and samastāḥ as sarve, which is to say fewer of the eight siddhis are manifested according to the power of the possessing agent. He concludes that fewer of these attributes are found in asuras, etc., and all in divinities (tatra vyastā guṇā asurādigrahāṇāṃ samastā devagrahāṇām).
86. Ḍalhaṇa confirms that saṃviśanti refers to sexual intercourse (te devayonayo manuṣyaiḥ saha na saṃviśanti). Thus, medical practitioners of the day must have encountered such claims, based, no doubt, on references in the epics and elsewhere to divinities and semidivine beings cohabiting with humans, e.g., Purūravas and Urvaśī. Ḍalhaṇa glosses āviśanti with anupraviśanti. Cf. Weiss 1977:54 for discussion of this verse.
87. “Infinite numbers,” koṭisahasrāyutapadmasaṃkhyāḥ: koṭi, ten million; sahasra, one thousand; ayuta, ten thousand; padma, according to Ḍalhaṇa, fourteen times the multiples of the previous numbers.
88. Ḍalhaṇa asks, rhetorically, how a being who shares at least part of the essence of deities can relish blood, fat, and flesh, etc. He answers that Nirṛti is the grandfather of the demons (nirṛtī rakśasāṃ pitāṃahaḥ), who, through their association with the deities, etc., acquired part of their natures.
89. Aruṇadatta glosses: sadyaḥ adhunātanaḥ pūrvajanmakṛto vā hetuḥ (action performed at the present time or during a previous birth).
90. See this chapter, n. 236, for more on the continued use of this term.
91. The editor of the text cites “Candra” (Candranandana’s Padārthacandrika): śmaśānacatvaracaityādiṣu (burning ground, crossroad, or [Jain or Buddhist] funeral mound).
92. parasūtakasaṅkaraḥ, cf. Candra: strīprasavasaṅkāryam; also Meulenbeld HIML IB:563n90, on this difficult term.
93. The critical text reads kāṣṭhāśvaṃ tathā (who mounts a wooden horse). This makes no contextual sense and at best could be an idiom (found nowhere else, so far as I am aware) for delusional sensory activity. In the absence of certainty with regard to that, however, the translation I offer is of a minority reading: kāṣṭḥāśmarāśim, for which, compare Caraka 6.9.20(8): aśmakāṣṭhādhirohaṇaratiṃ (who enjoys climbing on assorted heaps of garbage and walking on rags).
94. tṛṇachidram, lit. “one [who digs] holes in the grass”; Weiss: “who burrows in the grass” (1977: 291). Unfortunately no commentary addresses this compound. I prefer to take it metaphorically: chidra in its known meaning of “imperfection”; tṛṇa as “straw,” “grass,” “insignificant,” “minute,” “worthless.”
95. AṣṭāṅgaSam 7.2 replaces kūṣmāṇḍa with kārkhoda, but includes the kūṣmāṇḍa elsewhere. See Chapter 11, n. 97; this is surely a variant of khakhōrda. For more complete information on the kūṣmāṇḍa see Meulenbeld HIML IB:563n101.
96. The notes to the text provide several alternative readings: maukiraṇa, uttaruṇā, ramautkiraṇa. None of these help in identification of this enigmatic graha. For other occurrences of this word see Meulenbeld HIML IIB:564n103.
97. Cf. ibid.:564n104, for a discussion of this word. Cf. KSS 73.290 for vetālānupraviṣṭa, and 73.292 for vetālādhiṣṭhita.
98. Clifford 1984:10.
99. Weiss 1977:116.
100. Ibid.:183. It may be of interest to note here that what is now regarded as obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) was interpreted in Europe as demonic possession and treated with exorcism until the nineteenth century, when clinicians decided that this condition was a disease rather than the devil’s work. Freud recommended psychoanalytic guidance to free such victims from their obsession, which he believed was the result of being torn between guilty fear and defiant rage born of draconian toilet training. One treatment to which OCD has been surprisingly responsive is prefrontal lobotomy (PFL). Since the heyday of this treatment, genetic markers for OCD have been discovered in laboratory animals, and drugs such as Prozac and Zoloft, which are selective serotonin uptake inhibitors, have become cornerstones of treatment, though Pflis still often recommended in extreme cases.
101. Ibid.
102. Ibid. It is important to recognize that Weiss is not the first to attempt such an analysis. His work represents significant advances over that of Sinh Jee, who wrote in 1896: “The demoniacal diseases of the Hindus are but other words for hysteria, epilepsy, dancing mania, and other disorders of the nervous system” (cited by Weiss, 1977:53–54).
103. Though see Suśruta, Śārīrasthāna 1.18 for a similar, if less-detailed, passage. See also Manu 12.40–51 for a different model of sattvas.
104. Wujastyk (1998) gives an accessible account of the contents of these texts.
105. See also Weiss 1980:105, for a discussion of sattva. He says that Ca 4.4 uses it in the sense of “personality,” but that Ca 4.3 identifies it with manas.
106. Suddham here is equivalent to sāttvikam, characterized by sattvaguṇa.
107. Weiss mentions the “insane character” (1977:34) in the Mattavilāsaprahasana, but fails to mention that the character is possessed.
108. Meulenbeld states: “Weiss tried to correlate [mental disorders according to Āyurveda] with the syndromes of Western psychiatry. In my opinion, the results of his efforts are not convincing” (1997:197). However, I also agree with Meulenbeld’s more nuanced sentiment on Weiss’s work: “I would misrepresent the basic assumptions and views of M. Weiss if I were to attribute to him a simple scheme of one-to-one equivalents of Indian and Western diagnostic entities. He explicitly rejects this in theory, but, nevertheless, he often suggests it” (ibid.:192).
109. Murphy 1976:1027; cf. Weiss 1977:5.
110. Clifford 1984:xiii, 12.
111. This was the same decade that Obeyesekere published his initial studies and that Kakar (1978), Goldman (1978), Masson (1974, 1976), and others initially applied Freudian psychodynamics to Indian cultural and literary history. These studies stand out today as period pieces. Kripal 1995, discussed in Chapter 2, is much more substantive and sophisticated, though, as I pointed out there, not beyond criticism.
112. On Candranandana and his works, see Meulenbeld, HIML IA:665f. and notes; IIA:120ff. and notes.
113. See Fenner, who asserts: “All Tibetan writers have accepted the tradition that the rGyud bzhi is a translation of a Sanskrit medical book titled Amṛtahṛdayāṣṭāṅgaguhyopadeśa Tantra” (1996:458). This text needs to be found and checked, as there is much in Fenner’s article that is questionable. It is not mentioned at all by Meulenbeld in HIML. For a good discussion contextualizing the Gyu-zhi, see Obermiller 1989.
114. For an outline of the entire text, see Clifford 1984:237–241.
115. Ibid.:148.
116. Ibid.:149.
117. Ibid.:151–152. Also: “‘Ghosts’ and ‘evil spirits’ are not regarded simply as the projections of an unhealthy mind. For although they arose from projections, they are said to be real in a relative sense. That is, they have to be dealt with” (p. 159). Along the same lines, she states: “Two predominant themes emerge in the Dharma view of ‘demons.’ One, from the level of absolute truth, they do not exist. Like everything else, they have no self-nature. Two, from the level of relative truth, they have conditioned existence. One should protect oneself from their negative influence” (p. 161).
118. Ibid.:214. Heinroth’s most famous work was Störungen des Seelenlebens (Disorders of the Soul, 1818). Heinroth was the first to use the term “psychosomatic” to describe the connection between the psyche and the body.
119. Clifford 1984:219.
120. Ibid. On the relationship between emotional and humoral imbalance, see Meulenbeld 1997:208–209.
121. Indeed, Clifford repeatedly defends Buddhist positionings. I look forward to a more perspicacious approach to cross-cultural, particularly Buddhist, psychology. Clifford’s effort may be compared to Vogt 1999, discussed in Chapter 4, in that the point of reference for both is abhidharma and that neither inspires confidence in their psychoanalytic expertise. In this sense, Weiss’s study is more reliable. As mentioned earlier (see Chapter 2), a more productive cross-cultural methodological exercise is Littlewood 1996.
122. Clifford 1984:167.
123. Vogt 1999:48.
124. Clifford 1984:154.
125. Ibid.:155.
126. Ibid.:176–177.
127. Ibid.:18o.
128. Ibid.:177.
129. Ibid.:180.
130. Ibid.:177.
131. Ibid.:180.
132. Ibid.:184–195.
133. Ibid.:195–197.
134. Ibid.:195.
135. Nevertheless, her study would have been greatly enhanced if she had utilized Weiss’s work, which was completed several years before the publication of her book, or if she had used the published and translated āyurvedic texts as a check on her textual history.
136. For example, Lutz 1988; Lynch 1990. Recall Lutz’s argument that emotion is an “ideological practice.”
137. On this, and much more about the sources and variation of emotion, see the comprehensive study of Nussbaum, 2001:151ff., passim.
138. This opposes Freud, who argued, at least in Totem and Taboo (1946), for the universal applicability of his system.
139. Very few studies have been conducted on the origins of any of these classifications. See, however, Mukherjee (1981) for speculations on an early group of five: pitṛ, gandharva, deva, asura, and rakṣas.
140. In addition to those mentioned below, some Purāṇas describe a certain class of beings as simply “possessors” (āvesaka); cf. VayuP 2.8.40, ŚivaP 2.2.33.22a, SkandaP 1.2.26.42c.
141. A brief text that I cannot deal with extensively here (because I did not discover it until the present manuscript was sent off to press) is the Āviṣṭaceṣṭāvidhiparivartaḥ (ĀCVP), “Chapter on Instructions Regarding Behavior of the Possessed,” appearing in the Mahāyānasūtrasaṃgraha, Part 2, pp. 255–259. This text is taken from the Mañjusrimulakalpa (MMK), the exact dating of which is uncertain, but appears to have roots as early as the fourth century C.E., but was probably not fully compiled until the tenth century. This fragment, like the rest of the MMK, is presented as a dialogue between Sākyamuni and Mañjusri Kumārabhūta. The question Mañjusrī poses to Sākyamuni concerns the behavior of people whose bodies have been possessed by other beings, including Buddhist teachers (ārya), divine beings, mendicants, perfected spiritual practitioners, gandharvas, yakṣas, rakṣasas, piśācas, great serpent beings (mahoraga), and so on, whether human or nonhuman, what kinds of physical actions and symptoms of these beings are revealed by these individuals, as well as the different courses of action to be taken in such cases.
     Sākyamuni then delivers a discourse in 59 verses that covers two topics. The first deals with the symptoms of positive possession, describing the symptoms of auspiciousness in a person thus possessed by a deva. The second topic is a linguistic circumnavigation of India, attributing the peculiarities of speech in different parts of the subcontinent to a primal ancestor that could be identified as a yakṣa, mahoraga, kinnara, piśāca, garuḍa, and so on, along with a caricature of the speech of these regions, in phonological detail. Thus, this text should be of interest to scholars who study the dialectology of first millennium C.E. South Asia. Also of interest is the fact that the word most commonly employed in the ACVP for possession is avatāra (“descent,” which we have discussed above in reference to bhakti texts), though the words āveśa and āviṣṭa also appear in the text. It appears then, that the ACVP employs demonology as a sociolinguistic trope, rendering it qualitatively different from its use in the āyurvedic and tantric literature.
142. For the full story of the discovery of the manuscripts and an accounting of the contents, see Wujastyk 1998:195ff.
143. Hoernle 1909:2:223, 227; plate 49, part 6, leaf i, Reverse. Compare this to a sixth-century manuscript fragment from Bāmiyān; cf. Ojihara 1984:308.
144. Perhaps this is identical to Vinatā, the śakunigrahaḥ, from the MBh (3.219.26) noted earlier.
145. Cf. MBh 3.269.2, in which Pūtana is an enemy of Rama. But this is probably the same as the Pūtanā-graha (despite the short “a” at the end of the word) from MBh 3.219.26–27.
146. Cf. AVŚ 8.6.21, chyaka; this hymn is meant for the protection of pregnant women and therefore precedes the notion of bālagraha in the MBh and the medical literature. This hymn contains a large number of difficult words; cf. Whitney 1905 II:493ff. Hoernle suggests “unnatural change in appearance” (1909:2:227n5) after Caraka 5.7, Susruta 1.31: “morbid appearance” (ibid.:172n383). On chāyā-graha, see Jamison 1991:142ff.
147. Hoernle regards this problematic word as most likely an orthographic error for dustāraka (difficult to cross over), hence “evil eye” (1909:2:227n6). However, this word appears in the ACVP unambiguously as the name of a possessor.
148. It is not possible that in this context maruta indicates either the vedic deities known as the Maruts, or Hanumān, even as a possessing entity, one of whose names more than a millennium later was Mārutī; cf. Chapter 11, on possession of Hanumān.
149. Cf. Manu 12.71cd, amedhyakuṇapāśī ca kṣatriyaḥ kaṭapūtanaḥ (a kaṭapūtana is a kṣatriya [spirit] that eats impure objects and corpses). Kullūka glosses amedhyakuṇapāśī as purīṣaśavabhojī (an excrement and corpse eater). Manu 12.71–72 contains equally horrific fates for members of other varṇas who neglect their ordained duties, but for some reason kṣatriyas alone were singled out here.
150. This term is still widely used in Kerala; cf. Caldwell 1999:213.
151. There is a class of tantric texts, now mostly lost, called bhūtatantras. One of them, the Totula, is quoted by Kṣemarāja in his commentary on Netra Tantra 19.70.
152. This division (or variants of it) is often found in tantric texts. See, e.g., NT 19.30c–31: balikāmas tathā cānye bhoktukāmās tathāpare || ratikāmā hantukāmā vātajāḥ pittajāḥ pare | śleṣmajāḥ saṃnipātotthā bhūtā vividharūpakāḥ || (Various species of bhūta, fond of sacrifice, of eating, of sex, and of killing, are produced from disorders of wind, bile, phlegm, and all three together [saṃnipātajāḥ], respectively). The commentary on NT glosses bhoktukāmāḥ as māṃsaraktābhilāṣiṇaḥ (desirous of meat and blood).
153. Verse 1 reads heḍhra. I am not able to locate this word elsewhere in Sanskrit or Prakrit. I am grateful to Robert Zydenbos for the following: “It could be a Sanskritised Dravidian word. Kannada has a word heḍḍa, ‘a dull, stupid man, a fool’ [Kittel 1968–71:4:1755], with derived words like heḍḍatana / heḍḍu ‘stupidity, foolishness,’ and heḍḍāṭa, ‘stupid, foolish behaviour’” (e-mail communication, February 16, 2003). It appears, then, that we can be fairly certain that heḍhra was Sanskritized from this or a related South Dravidian word. See Prasnamārga, an astrological text in Sanskrit from Kerala (dealt with below), for the word hedva (15.62c), with probably the same meaning. The description could be that of spasticity or another kind of muscular or motor disorder, or, just as likely, severe mental retardation.
154. sutkāravān (makes the sound sūt). This could also refer to whistling.
155. Dwyer reports: “As many Hindus often comment, ‘Women have a weak heart; so spirits severely attack them’” (aurato ke kamzor dil hotā hai; islīe bhūt-pret us par jyādā hamlā karte hai)” (2003:45).
156. Kane (HDh I.2:800 ff.) dates it to 1360–1390.
157. The other important work is the Vīrasiṃhāvaloka; see below, n. 248.
158. For a more extended explanation of the principles of this literature, see Nambiyar’s introduction to the Sanskrit text of the Madanamahārṇava, pp. 15ff.
159. Nambiyar, in his introduction to the MM, writes: “Most of the causes are more or less connected with immorality and violation of the social customs and manners” (p. 25). For an account of karmavipāka in more canonical dharmasāstra texts, see Rocher 1980.
160. On the problems of violence and killing in the ritual arena, see Knipe 2004: “goats and humans have identical structures and therefore goats are the best offerings to the gods. No goat is ever ‘killed,’ that is, annihilated. Rather, it is transformed by ritual speech and practice” (p. 438). See also Houben 1999; Tull 1996.
161. Cf. Taittirīya Āraṇyaka II.7. This is performed before most śrauta rituals, rites of passage (saṃskāra), and other complicated brahmanical ceremonies.
162. Cf. Kane HDh IV:134ff.
163. Ashok Aklujkar has suggested to me that the reading apastamba could be wrong, that it could be avaṣṭhambha, which can have the meaning “arrogant” or “resolute.” However, the text does not record a pāṭhabheda here, nor do the orthographic possibilities support such a reading.
164. Probably he was a Ṛgvedin, as he quotes the entire sūkta, ṚV 6.24 in his comments on the karṇagraha. This sort of block quotation is unusual in Sanskritic commentarial tradition.
165. The discussion on the navagraha, probably a “new” or “recent spirit” rather than one of the nine planets, refers explicitly to a sexually transmitted disease. This spirit afflicts a man who has had sex with the wife of a friend, an ascetic, a guru, of a master. He is afflicted with a burning penis (meḍhradāhī), among other things.
166. This is the view of Kātyāyana, cited by the MM. Viśveśvara Bhaṭṭa comments that the rice and ghee can be offered separately.
167. Cf. Śāṇkhāyana ŚSū 9.9.5 (cf. Āśvālāyana ŚSū 8.6.13 for a slightly different application). That Viśveśvara Bhaṭṭa would know the ritual applications for this also suggests that he is a Ṛgvedin.
168. The Vidhānamālā (Garland of Ritual), a text probably dating to the nineteenth century, deals with this topic in much more abbreviated and bloodless fashion. Cf., e.g., VM, p. 26, for an account of the karṇagrahapīḍāśamana-vidhānam (ritual that allays affliction by a karṇagraha), p. 27, for the skandagrahapīḍāśamana-vidhānam (ritual that allays affliction by a skandagraha), and p. 28, for the skandāpasmārapīḍāśamana-vidhānam (ritual that allays affliction by a skadāpasmāragraha), and other childhood and planetary grahas.
169. Thanks to Ashok Aklujkar for this suggestion.
170. Shukla 1980:170f. For a lively but fragmentary account of a local North Indian demonology, see Kakar 1982:20-31.
171. Shukla 1980:170f. Also see Parry 1994:230f. for discussion of some of the same material. Note Parry’s statement, which we have countered often here, “that spirit possession is really an oblique aggressive strategy by which the weak and the exploited get back at those who oppress them” (p. 231). An example of a more recent “orientalist” missionary who dealt with this is McClintock (1990), dealt with in Chapter 2. His detailed account of bhūtavidyā draws largely from others’ ethnographies, rather than from his own work in Pakistan in the 1980s. Thus, his account does not situate the material in a specific local tradition or geographic area. He lists five categories of bhūta among Muslims in India (and presumably Pakistan): (1) jinn (a class of beings between angels and men); (2) pari (fairy of entrancing beauty); (3) shayatin or shaitan (devils, demon hosts, fallen angels); (4) ifrit (a powerful and malignant genius, the ghosts of the wicked are sometimes so termed) (5) marid (an evil genius of the most powerful kind) (pp. 39–40). McClintock’s Christian evangelism biases his description and views of other people’s beliefs and practices; it is thus comparatively unhelpful. Although his outlook is more generous than that of Ziegenbalg in the early eighteenth century, he still does not understand academic ethnography. His main source is Crooke 1894. It is valuable that he brought together Crooke’s data in a single organized list; yet to him it serves no purpose other than to vouchsafe the indigenous people’s need for a liberating nonsuperstitious Christianity.
172. Pollock 1991:81.
173. This word is uncertain, possibly from būṛnā. Shukla’s transliteration is random, at best.
174. Another problematic word, possibly marua.
175. The word ḍīh refers to a mound on which its shrine is situated. I am grateful to Philip Lutgendorf for assisting me with these Hindi terms and their significance. For another extensive catalogue of local bhūtas and a discussion of their relations with disease, see Prabhu 1977.
176. Maloney 1980:245.
177. Maloney suggests, rather, that this is from “Buddha,” but I question this.
178. I have doubts about this etymology.
179. For these descriptions, see ibid.:242–246.
180. Ibid.:254.
181. Such numbers occur in Tantras as well. For example, see NT 19.62cd-63: “I made thirty trillion (triṃśatkoṭī sahasrāṇām) fearsome Vināyakas with the brightness of blazing fires from my thumb. If someone is impeded by them he will be overcome.” Cf. McHugh 2000.
182. The idea of hordes, gaṇas, acting for good and ill is a persistent and powerful idea, dating from the earliest vedic texts to the adālat of Bālājī described in Chapter 4.
183. For the cakrapūja and tantric sexual ritual, see Bharati 1965:228ff.; Marglin 1985:227f., White 2003.
184. Rāmāyaṇa 3.36.20ab: krīḍāratividhijñānāṃ samājotsavaśālinām; cf. Pollock 1991:79, 163.
185. Ibid.:79n170.
186. Ibid.:83–84.
187. In the NP, however, this ritual of apparent fertility appears, rather oddly, in the fall, perhaps as a final opportunity for revelry before the Kashmiri winter sets in.
188. See the translations earlier of Ca 6.9.20.8, Su 6.60.15, AH 6.4.30–34b, ĪŚP 42.22ab.
189. See the Kāśīkhaṇḍa of the Skanda Purāṇa (uttarārdha, ch. 54) and trans. Tagare (1997:28–35). See also the Pisācamocanamāhātmyam, published in 1910, which contains an introduction in Hindi describing the Pisācmocan tīrtha and its importance, the SkP chapter, the Śrīkapardīśa Stotra, and instructions for the ancestral rites to be performed at the temple tank (piśācamocane tripiṇdīśrāddhavidhiḥ). See Parry 1994:242ff. for an ethnography of an exorcism at Pisācmocan.
190. Daniel Cohen reports a phenomenon known as pretpañcayat, modeled after the local village governing body called pañcāyat (cf. Chapter 4, on the venue for exorcism at Bālājī modeled on another judicial paradigm, the adālat). The pretpañcayat features competition between exorcists, usually in family disputes, brother against brother. Cohen observes that the primary locus of exorcism in Varanasi is the exorcist, not any temple or specific place, including Pisācmocan. What this means in practice is that exorcisms are generally performed in the home of the client or the “office” of the exorcist, not usually in a public arena like a temple. I am grateful to Cohen for sharing with me his research and insights on the Pisācmocan temple.
191. This term is used by Dārila, in his commentary on Kausikasutra 25.22; cf. Bahulkar 1994:90.
192. Wujastyk 1998:212–235; cf. also Kāśyapa Saṃhitā, pp. 351–374.
193. For a fairly comprehensive discussion of bālagrahas in the major āyurvedic texts and the Agnipurāṇa, see Kumar 1994:284–312. See especially p. 287, table 42, which compares the names of the bālagrahas in different texts (though without explanation). Kumar does not theorize about balagrahas, except to enter into highly suspicious speculations on the diseases wrought by them. For example, affliction by Revatī (“Lady Opulence,” in Wujastyk’s felicitous translation) results in diarrhea, dehydration, anemia, and vitamin B deficiency; Mukhamaṇḍikā afflicts with “Indian Childhood Cirrhosis,” etc. (p. 304).
194. Also bhūtābhiṣaṅga (intimate contact with a bhūta) (Su 6.39.60; Ca 6.3.116; Bhāvaprakāsa 8.1); and bhutopasarga (touched by a bhūta) (BhP 4.29.23). The Śabdakalpadruma cites under āveśaḥ (1:194): bhūtādinā rogaḥ; bhūtasaṃcāraḥ, grahādayaḥ (Rājanighaṇṭu); āsaktiḥ, abhiniveśaḥ (Raghuvaṃśa 5.19).
195. tasyās tu dharma eva nivṛttikāraṇam uktam iti | KS kalpasthānam 6(?).3.7 (Kāśyapa Saṃhitā, p. 352).
196. To take one further example from the later āyurvedic tradition as a case in point, see Aḍhamalla’s Dīpikā on the varieties of bālagraha presented in the thirteenth-century Śārṇgdhara Saṃhitā. Aḍhamalla states that “seizers [graha] beginning with skandas possess children” (skandagrahādayo bāleṣv āviśanti). Thus, by the time of Śārṅgdhara, followed by Aḍhamalla in the fifteenth century, graha was defined in terms of āveśa (rather than the more expected praveśa). Śārṅgadhara lists twelve varieties of bālagraha: tathā bālagrahāḥ khyātā dvādaśaiva munīśvaraiḥ | skandagrāho viśākhaḥ syāt svagrahaś ca pitṛgrahaḥ | naigameyagrahas tadvac chakuniḥ śītapūtanā | mukhamaṇḍitikā tadvat pūtanā cāndapūtanā || revatī caiva saṃkhyātā tathā syāc chuṣkarevatī | (1.7.189–191b).
197. On Khaḍgarāvaṇa and the lost Khaḍgarāvaṇabālacikitsā, see Goudriaan 1977. On Khaḍgarāvaṇa as a form of Śiva, also called Caṇḍeśvara, Rudra, and Caṇḍāsidhārāpati (Lord of the Edge of the Fierce Sword), see Bühnemann 1999:325. On the importance of Rāvaṇa in this context, see Zysk (1985:67) for discussion of the Rāvaṇaproktabālācikitsāsūtra, a pediatrics text; also Filliozat (1937:159–178), on the Buddhist transformation of Rāvaṇa into a peaceful king with healing powers. Filliozat’s volume is an expansion of his earlier article (1935). The Kumāratantra draws heavily from the MBh, AV, Caraka, and Suśruta, all of which Filliozat discusses in detail. The Nārāyaṇīya mentioned here is undoubtedly the Tantrasārasaṃgraha, known in Kerala as the Viṣanārāyanīya. For this text, see below.
198. The text prescribes the manner in which the mantras are to be recited. The terms tārapūrvaṃ namo ’ntam and praṇavādinamo ’ntam (beginning with o and ending with namaḥ) or svāhāntaḥ (ending with svāha) often indicate the recitation of a full mantra or series of mantras. This is irrespective of whether the mantra actually ends with namaḥ or svāhā. Tāra is equivalent to praṇava while ṭhaṭha indicates svāhā.
199. Cf. ĪŚP 41, p. 288.
200. On Rajasthan (and rural UP), see the video Kusum (see Chapter 4, n. 17). The healer, who was not an āyurvedic physician, gave the father of the possessed girl (Kusum) a handful of packets of an undisclosed substance with instructions to burn them regularly in front of the girl.
201. I am grateful to Vaidyamadham Cheriya Narayanan Nambudiri for this information.
202. On aṣṭavaidya physicians, see Zimmermann 1987:212–213, and below.
203. This sort of “hot” substance is a tantric innovation; it is not commonly offered to Śiva, generally considered a “cool” or ascetic deity.
204. For this reason neem twigs have long been a common form of toothbrush in India and are still widely used in the countryside.
205. In modern-day India, sprouts of various kinds are germinated on a small raised plot of ground inside the house as part of the ritual of the nine-day festival to the goddess (Durgāpūjā) in the month of Asvina (September–October). It is likely that this is a very old practice.
206. Cf. Meulenbeld HIML IB:237n6. Meulenbeld does not suggest a botanical name or identification for this plant.
207. For closer examinations of the KausSu on this, see Bahulkar 1994:109–110, Bloomfield 1897:263–264, and Zysk 1985:29–31.
208. Chapters 11–16 deal with bālagrahas and unmāda. This text is in print and can thus be compared to the account in the ĪŚP also see Meulenbeld HIML IIA:456–457, IIB:468–469.
209. Mother of the dark graha Rāhu, daughter of Dakṣa or Kaśyapa and wife of Kaśyapa or Vipracitti; cf. MBh 1.59.12,30.
210. This bija is exclaimed at the funeral pyre when the skull cracks and the jīva exits the body.
211. Many of the words here (e.g., mañja, kaḍhḍha, and ṭhaṭha) are incomprehensible and would be accepted for their mantric value alone were it not for the fact that this mantra reads rather differently, and more comprehensibly, in the text of the Nārāyaṇīya, viz. the Tantrasārasaṃgraha (pp. 158–60), demonstrating that the ĪŚP had either corrupted it or was itself in possession of a corrupt version. The mantra in the Nārāyaṇīya reads: oṃ namaḥ sarvamātṝṇāṃ hṛdayaṃ moṭaya bhañja paṭa sphoṭaya sphura gṛhṇa ākaṭu troṭaya | evaṃ siddhiṃ jñāpayati | hara nirdoṣaṃ kuru bālakaṃ bālo vā sarvagrāhīṇām upakramyatu | (Om, salutations to the heart of all the Little Mothers. Crush! Break! Rip! Flash! Spring forth! Possess! ākaṭu [You whose pungent odor comes forth(?)]. Break apart! One should announce this clearly. O Hara, make this child faultless or let the child approach all the possessing demonesses!) (The commentator advises doubling the impv. 2 sg. forms, e.g., moṭaya moṭaya, bhañja bhañja, consistent with what we have seen in the South Indian manuscripts examined in Chapter 11.) The text continues: oṃ cāmuṇḍe namo divye hraṃ hrīṃ apasarantu duṣṭagrahāḥ | hrūṃ tathā gacchantu guhyakāḥ | anyatra sthāne oṃ rudro jñāpayati ṭha ṭha | One of the striking features of these mantras is the extensive use of retroflex consonants, e.g., kaṭa, ṭhaṭha, troṭaya. This could be due to a brahmanical assignation of these mantras to lower-class, non-Sanskritic strata of society, in this case an assumption or recognition of Dravidian or tribal origins, as these languages have much more retroflexion than Sanskrit. For somewhat similar speculations regarding the secret speech of Himalayan tantras, see Davidson 2002:267ff.
212. Cf. the discussions in Chapter 4 of the work of Srinivas, Mumford, Pakaslahti, Dwyer, and Vogt, which provide very different models of healing processes associated with possession.
213. For a review of scholarship on the term yukti see Engler 2003:426, 428. Engler describes it as “empirically based inference,” drawing principally on CaSū 11.21–25 and arguing against its modern interpretation as scientific reasoning.
214. See F. Smith 1987 for an idea of how the vedic sacrificial rituals varied within traditions defined by affiliation with a single Śrautasūtra, such as Apastamba or Baudhāyana.
215. The eight powers (guṇāḥ) are probably the eight archetypal siddhis; see note 85.
216. SuUt 60.21cd: ye tv āviśantīti vadanti mohāt te bhūtavidyāviṣayād apohyāḥ|| Though Caraka says that grahas are innumerable (Ca 6.9.21.8, above, p. 490; also Su 6.60.22, above p. 492), he does not attribute the possession to lesser spirits in a hierarchy of fiends.
217. See Stephens for accounts of sex with demons as an “aspect of the more general European fixation on physical interaction with demons” (2003:14). Agreements were contractual, including the sale of one’s soul to the devil. This idea does not appear to have resonance in India, where such sexuality is more prominently formalized and medicalized. Nor did this lead to crises of belief among the Hindu clergy, as appears to have been the case among Christian clergy in Europe.
218. This is not so far-fetched as it may seem at first glance. See Slater 2003 on the work of the psychologist David Barlow of the Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders at Boston University. Slater writes:
     Barlow’s method for treating anxiety disorders is surprisingly simple, although its philosophical and clinical implications are anything but. He aims to reduce anxiety not by teaching customary relaxation techniques involving calming mantras or soothing imagery, but by doing just the opposite: forcing the patient to repeatedly face his most dreaded situation, so that, eventually, he becomes accustomed to the sensation of terror. Barlow claims he can rid some people of their symptoms in as little as five to eight days. His treatment promises to be psychotherapy’s ultimate fast track, but while many clinicians praise its well-documented results, others take a dimmer view of what one clinician calls “torture, plain and simple.” (p. 34)
     There can be little doubt that the extreme forms of psychological treatment recommended by Caraka et al. were as controversial in their day as Barlow’s are today, testifying, at the very least, to the composite nature of the āyurvedic compendia.
219. CaCi 6.9. 31cd: vismṛter hetor nayanti prakṛtiṃ manaḥ; cf. also 6.9.79–98.
220. On daivavyapāsrayacikitsā, see, in addition to the above, AHCi 1.171, 5.83–84; ASaṃSū 9.76; cp. Hārīta 3.3.2–3. Rasaratnasamuccaya 22.60–69; Chattopadhyaya 1979:314–320.
221. It is also possible that this term referred to internal practices, such as yoga, which do not require priestly or other formal mediation. Neither Caraka nor Susruta mentions yogic or Buddhist practices, to which sattvāvajaya might refer. Such practices might have been expunged from these texts in an attempt to enhance their scientific credibility. Their empiricism would have admitted observable or inferred phenomena, which to them included at least some ritual, use of gemstones, etc. By the same token, possession was admitted as a valid category, legitimated by repetition of characteristic behavior. For the same reason, sattvāvajaya, which must have been an inherited category with which they were uncomfortable, was relegated to the scantiest offhand mention. On the word sattvāvajaya, see references in note 2.
222. Oracular possession also may be characterized as a vāta disorder. Knipe observes that most goddess ritualists in coastal Andhra Pradesh are “by nature excitable, sometimes volatile and raucous, their monologues punctuated with belches, yawns, hiccups and other marks of incipient possession” (2004:440). All of these are characteristics of vātaprakopa (affliction due to vāta imbalance).
223. dṛṣṭaṃ spṛṣṭam athāghrātaṃ tad dhi sarvagrahāpaham; CaCi 6.9.62cd.
224. I am grateful to Robert Svoboda for this information (e-mail communication, March 4, 2003).
225. See the comments of Raman 1991:1:383. He states, on PrMā 12.62, that the proportion of dung, urine, milk, and yogurt should be 1:2:16:5. Raman does not note the proportion of ghee, but presumably the mixture should consist predominantly of ghee, the quantity of which might remain unspecified. Raman does not state his source. Vaidyamadham says that the ghee should measure four times the quantity of yogurt.
226. Cf. CaCi 6.9.50–52, for dog’s bile (śunaḥ pittam), beak and feather, probably incinerated, from inauspicious birds including the owl, vulture, and crow. These were likely recommended for their native properties that could contribute to an atmosphere inimical to bhūtas.
227. Recall that the mixing of animal with vegetal substances goes back to vedic times. Note in particular that surā, a kind of multigrain wine, produced for the Sautrāmaṇī sacrifice, is mixed with milk and the hair of a lion, wolf, and tiger (cf. Kane HDh II.2:1224–26). The Śatapatha Br. 12.7.3.19–21 (Eggeling 1900:229–230) demonstrates that the mythic idea is to include potent elements of wildness (raudra), because this is for Rudra. A similar notion of integrating different aspects of nature is presented here, the purpose of which is to present a multilevel front against offending bhūtas or grahas.
228. For recipes from the Tibetan Gyu-zhi, see Clifford 1984:88.
229. For a summary of the text, see Meulenbeld HIML IIA:86–90 and notes.
230. For dāruharidrā, elsewhere called dārunisā, see Meulenbeld HIML IIB:305n900, given as Berberis aristata DC. Like the barberry in Europe and the Oregon grape in North America, it is more a bush than an actual tree and possesses at least some of the medicinal properties of turmeric (haridra). The reason for preparing this under puṣya nakṣatra is not stated, but possibly the name puṣya itself, “prosperity,” is sufficient.
231. Vacā (Acorus calamus Linn.) is a widely used root that is dried and chewed to alleviate the discomforts of a sore throat. As mentioned earlier, it is also recommended for the enhancement of mental clarity. It is “hot” in the sense that it induces the release of heat in the body.
232. According to two of my āyurvedic informants, this is included because the cat has the capacity to recognize a bhūta, and the dried and ground up excrement captures that quality. Whether this kind of associative thinking was also that of the authors of the classical texts is uncertain.
233. The text says kesa (hair). However, according to my āyurvedic informants, this means jaṭāmāṃsī, a cooling and sweet root that is easily acquired and is often used in havan (tantrically inspired fire ritual). The word jaṭā means “dreadlock,” specifically those of sādhus, grown in the image of Śiva. Thus, jaṭāmāṃsī may be viewed as a kind of keśa.
234. Priya Vrat Sharma, the editor and translator of the published text of the Cakradatta, translates pakvaindrī, as “ripe fruits of indravāruṇī mixed with cow-urine and ghee,” following the commentary (pakvaindrīphalamūlajam sājyam).
235. In fact, mayurapiccha does contain trace elements of copper and gold, which was apparently known by classical practitioners of tantric medicine. Baidyanath, the well-known Indian pharmaceutical firm, manufactures an antispasmodic under the trade name Mayuracandrikā Bhasma, in which the central ingredient is mayurapiccha. The indications on the container state: “Antiemetic. Relieves hiccough, asthma, and vomiting.” All of these are vāta conditions. Similarly, sarpanirmoka (snake skin) is recommended today as an ingredient in a dhūpa meant for alleviating piles—another vāta affliction.
236. Some vaidyas have altered their views, however, under the influence of Western scientific and psychological theory. Dr. Raghavan Thirumulpad of Chalakudy (Thrissur District), the most prolific modern author of āyurvedic texts in Malayalam, explained to me that bhūtonmāda is always the result of one’s mistaken or non-dharmic actions, prajñāparādha, a word taken from the āyurvedic texts (cf. above AH 6.4.4), which I have often heard vaidyas (and many others, including a variety of vedāntins) use as a descriptor for moral transgression. In his view, bhutonmāda is comparatively rare today, because of changes in contemporary belief systems. This, he says, is an artifact of outdated cultural notions. This view expresses the voice of modern, Western-influenced Sanskritic culture. On his diagnostic approach to bhutonmāda, he said: udāharaṇamātraṃ tu budhimatāṃ, yadoktānusāram evāśrayo maṇḍabudhīnām (An intelligent physician is free to design a clinical approach to each problem, irrespective of the texts, but a slow-witted one strictly adheres to the letter of the texts). This has apparently been the practical approach of Āyurveda for millennia.
237. Shadows of this might have once been found in Buddhism, where Āryaśūra, in his Jātakamālā, refers to experts in bhūtavidyā as Siddhavidyās; cf. White 1996:58.
238. For an account of the possession at the Chottanikkara “Bhagavathy” temple near Tripunithura in the eastern suburbs of Cochin/Ernakulam, see F. Smith 2004.
239. The institution founded by P. S. Varier, the Arya Vaidya Sala, maintains its home base in Kottakkal, but has dispensaries and pharmaceutical outlets throughout India. According to one of my informants familiar with the Arya Vaidya Sala educational system, this institution has trained more than four hundred non-Hindu vaidyas, most of them Muslims. I have also encountered a number of non-Brahman and Christian vaidyas trained at the aṣṭavaidya medical colleges. The education in the latter institutions is still conducted by Nambudiris, some of whom know the entire AH by heart. I have met a few non-Brahman Hindu pandits in the Varier tradition who have also memorized the entire AH. I mention this to counter the common assertion that only Brahmans study Sanskrit and only Hindus study Āyurveda. In both Kerala traditions, however, I found the non-Hindu vaidyas considerably less skilled because they did not have access to the Sanskrit texts.
240. A measure of his prestige is that he also bears the title sālāvaidyam. This title indicates that he has the unique eligibility (adhikāra) to sit in a vedic sacrificial arena (yāgasāla) during the performance of a soma sacrifice. In Kerala a doctor is required in a sacrifice, and only a sālāvaidyam is qualified. Vaidyamadham is a follower of the Dakṣiṇāmūrti temple at Shukapuram in Mallapuram District. Historically, he says only members of his family have served as sālāvaidya. Frits Staal does not mention this position in Agni, his massive 1983 study of a vedic agnicayana performed in central Kerala in 1975. Thus, it is doubtful that this tradition is or has been in general currency throughout Kerala. In order to confirm his eligibility for the position of sālāvaidyam, at one time he had to spend forty-one days at this temple “doing dhyāna and bhajan,” meditating and singing hymns to the deity. In addition, he says, yajñikas or sacrificial patrons (āhitāgnis) assemble at this Dakṣiṇāmūrti temple to practice for their sacrifices, as Dakṣiṇāmūrti is “the deity for right thinking.”
241. The botanical identity of this herb is disputed, as several plants have been identified with this name. One possibility is Convolvulus pluricaulis. Another is Canscora decussata, reportedly used for śaṅkhapuṣpi in Bengal and parts of north India. A third is Clitoria ternatea, reportedly used for śaṅkhapuṣpi in Kerala. In any case, śaṅkhapuṣpi is said to increase sattva (brightness, mental clarity, positive qualities) and was prescribed for use in brāhmighṛta and other tonics for the nervous system. (I am grateful to Robert Svoboda for this information.) For similar information, see AH Uttarasthana 1.43, 6.24–25, 7.24, 39.44–51. It has also been called viṣṇukrānta, probably denoting that parts of the plant were used in Hindu worship. See www.thehimalayadrugco.com/herbfinder/h_evolvulus.htm; for the results of research on it, see http://ccras.org/publication/clinical&experimental_1.htm.
242. This is the family of P. Nilakanthan Nambudiri, with whom I also spoke at length. Their burgeoning practice is limited to the treatment of mental disorders. A large majority of their clients are Muslim girls, as Mallapuram District, listed in the 1991 census of India at 68 percent Muslim, now probably has an even higher proportion (this information is missing in the 2001 census). The family of Nilakanthan has a residential facility and empowers their medicines with mantras and puja, all of which are tightly guarded family secrets. For a more complete description of the Poomkutil treatment center, see Unnikrishnan 1998.
243. For more on this bhūta, see Tarabout 2003.
244. Cf. Inden 1992.
245. For all of this, see the rather hurried and unreliable edition and translation by Raman (1991). It is to a great extent this systematic elegance (or elegant systematics) that makes astrology (jyotiṣa) so attractive in India to this day.
246. See Brahmānand Tripāṭhī’s note on this in his Hindi commentary on the AH titled Nirmalā: āyurved kā jyotiṣaśāstra se ghaniṣṭh sambandh hai (Ayurveda’s relationship with the sastra of astrology is of the closest kind).
247. Trans. Keith 1914:118.
248. The connection between astrology, tantric ritual, and Āyurveda is found elsewhere in India; it is not limited to Kerala. Another text that is much more expansive on this than the PrMā is the Vīrasiṃhāvaloka, composed in North India, possibly in Gwalior, dated 1383 (see Meulenbeld HIML IIA:229–230 and notes). This text, never the subject of serious academic study, deserves far more attention than I can give it here. It purports to be a jyotiśśāstrakarmavipākāyurvedaprayoga, a term that appears in the colophon to each of its seventy-one chapters. It is a handbook discussing the astrology (jyotiḥ) and karmic causes of disease (karmavipāka, see the above discussion on the Madanamahārṇava), and at length describes medicinal treatments for more than fifty diseases. Curiously, the astrological significations are absent from the account of unmāda, though they are present in the account of apasmāra. The bulk of the section on unmāda consists of recipes for medicated ghees, powders (cūrṇa), and fumigants (dhūpa). It is possible to argue, drawing from Langford’s view of Āyurveda as a cultural commodity in the West today (2002:263ff.), that the four of these taken together—astrology, medicine, ritual, and karmavipāka—have constituted a form of local knowledge and correlative local commodity for more than a thousand years. For more on the situation at present, see Friedman 1986; Perinbanayagam 1982; Pugh 1983.
249. Clifford 1984:157–158. Kakar reports the following on Tibetans in exile in India: “If the patient is possessed by a bhūta, his eyes move downward toward the left; in the case of possession by a dakini—a female spirit often addressed as ‘Mother,’ who is said to bestow esoteric knowledge and power on its devotees—the eyes move upward toward the right” (1982:110).
250. Cf. Meulenbeld HIML IIA:348–52. This text is widely cited in Maharashtra as an authority on strīroga, (diseases of women), especially regarding questions of childbirth.
251. This is from the first few pages of the YR, pp. 12–14 of the Varanasi edition, verses 1–3, 11–20, 22.
252. The same vaidyas prescribe pearl (muktā) and silver (rajata) bhasmas for nija unmāda.
253. The nine gems are: Sun–ruby (māṇikya), Moon–pearl (mauktika, muktā), Mars–red coral (pravāla, vidruma), Mercury–emerald (gārutmata, garudodgāra), Jupiter–yellow sapphire (puṣparāga = topaz), Venus–diamond (vajra, hīra, or often simply ratna), Saturn–blue sapphire (indranīla), Rāhu–hessonite or onyx (gomeda), Ketu–cat’s eye (vaiḍūrya). For variations on these gems and how to prepare them, see the sixteenth-century encyclopedia Āyurvedasaukhya 4.649–701. For information on gems in ancient India, see the references cited in Meulenbeld HIML IIB:742–743nn.389–403. Navaratna bhasma is, needless to say, very expensive. It is, however, available.
254. Cf. Meulenbeld HIML IIA:581–787 (Part 10), works on rasaśāstra and ratnaśāstra.
255. An edition of this was published in the 1990s in Lhasa. See Byams-pa ’Phrinlas and Wang Lei n.d.:32, thangka 63 and description, pp. 402–405, and thangkas 66–68, pp. 33–34, descriptions, pp. 430–443. This extraordinary text deserves much closer work than that volume gives it.
256. One of these is reproduced schematically in Clifford 1984:158; two are reproduced in Tsarong et al. 2001:116.
257. Clifford 1984:159.
258. Tsarong et al. 2001:118.
259. While virtually all āyurvedic compendia of the past few centuries have an obligatory section on bhūtavidyā, this was not always the case in the first millennium. For example, the Siddhasāra of Ravigupta (from Kashmir, c. 650 C.E.) does not. See Siddhasāra:2:307–313, ch. 20, on unmāda, Āveśa is not mentioned. Ch. 29, called kumāratantra, is somewhat more relevant in its concern with pharmacopeia. The Siddhasāra was translated into Tibetan, Uighur, and Khotanese (at least). This text includes Ronald Emmerick’s edition of the Sanskrit and Tibetan versions.
260. However, see White 2003:35ff., and above Ch. 6 note 52.
261. See Reddy 2000 and Langford 2002 for illuminating theoretical accounts of the modernization of Āyurveda.
 
    