+++
title = "01 EARLY REFERENCES TO PĀRVATĪ"

+++

The goddess Satī-Pārvatī does not appear in Vedic literature. Several references to Śiva’s sister or wife do occur in Vedic texts, but the names for these deities only connect them tenuously, if at all, to the later Satī-Pārvatī. A being named Ambikā \(a common epithet for several goddesses in the later tradition, especially Durgā\) is called Śiva’s sister in one passage,1 while in another text she is said to be his consort.2 Elsewhere in Vedic literature Śiva’s wife is called Rudrāni. These references are never detailed enough to enable us to know if the deity named has any resemblance to the later, fully developed goddess Satī-Pārvatī.

The *Kena-upaniṣad* contains a goddess named Umā Haimavatī \(3.12\). This is one of the most common names of the later Satī-Pārvatī, but this reference does not associate the goddess with Śiva, nor does it associate her with mountains, except by name \(Haimavatī meaning “she who belongs to Himavat,” who is the Himalaya Mountains personified as a god\). Her primary role in this text is that of a mediator who reveals the knowledge of *brahman* to the gods. She appears in the text suddenly, and as suddenly disappears. It is little more than conjecture to identify her with the later goddess Satī-Pārvatī, although quite naturally later writers do make the identification when describing the exploits of Satī or Pārvatī. To devotees of the goddess this early Upaniṣadic reference provides proof of her venerable history in the Hindu tradition; later texts that extol Śiva and Pārvatī retell the episode in such a way as to leave no doubt that it is śiva’s spouse who appears before the assembled gods in order to reveal to them the truth that Śiva is absolute reality and underlies them all.3

Both textual and archaeological evidence for the existence of Satī-Pārvatī appear by the epic period \(400 B.C.- A.D. 400\). Both the *Rāmāyaṇa* and *Mahābhārata* present Satī-Pārvatī as the wife of Śiva. Several important mythological events, though not told in detail, are referred to in the epics, and it is clear that the central themes of the later, developed mythology featuring Satī-Pārvatī are known to the epic writers. The *Mahābhārata* describes the destruction of Dakṣa’s sacrifice \(10.18; 12.274\), mentions the birth of Kārttikeya and the defeat of the demon Tāraka \(3.213–216; 13.83–84\), and describes Śiva and Pārvatī as dwelling in the Himalayas, where they sport and play dice \(13.140.43–44\). Although not numerous, some images of Pārvatī, or at least a goddess associated with Śiva or a śaiva symbol, appear on coins in this period.4
