+++
title = "02 THE MYTHOLOGY OF SATĪ"

+++

Not until the plays of Kālidāsa \(fifth to sixth century A.D.\) and the *Purānas* \(A.D. 350 through the thirteenth century\) do we find the central myths of Satī and Pārvatī told in detail. Two distinct goddesses emerge in this fully developed mythology: Satī, the daughter of Dakṣa, who becomes Śiva’s first wife, and Pārvatī, daughter of Himavat and his wife Menā, who is a reincarnation of Sati and becomes Śiva’s second wife. Although the mythologies of the two goddesses \(or the two lives of the same goddess\) are similar in many details \(and have probably influenced each other\), each goddess \(or each life of the goddess\) is distinctive enough to be treated separately.

The goddess Satī sets out to win the great god Śiva for her husband.5 In some versions of the myth Satī’s quest is instigated by the god Brahma, Dakṣa’s father, who wants to humiliate Śiva because Śiva had insulted him earlier.6 Śiva had laughed at Brahmā when Brahmā had lusted after his own daughter, and Brahmā vowed to seduce Śiva into the pangs of sexual passion. Elsewhere the motive is more vague. In the Rudra-sarṁitā of the *Śiva-purāṇa* Brahmā says that if Śiva is not involved in the created world the creation will lack auspiciousness \(in fact Śiva means “auspicious”\) \(2.11.27\) or that the creation simply will not be able to continue \(2.11.43\). In fact, these latter reasons for involving Śiva in sex and marriage are more helpful in understanding the underlying meanings of the Satī myths than the more common reason of Brahmā’s getting even with Śiva.

Satī is usually described as beautiful, but in most versions of her mythology it is her devotion and asceticism that attract Śiva’s attention \(2.16.39, 44, 50\). At times she is tested by Śiva, or an agent of Śiva, but she always persists, and in the end Śiva grants her a boon for her austerities. She asks to marry him, and he agrees, having discovered at some point the presence of desire \(*kāma*\), which has made her extremely desirable. She insists upon a proper marriage involving rituals and guests, despite Śiva’s impatience. Brahmā acts as the divine priest, and the two are duly married. At some point in the narrative, tension begins to develop between Dakṣa \(Satī’s father\) and Śiva. The tension arises from Dakṣa’s distaste for Śiva’s odd appearance and strange habits. As a world renouncer Śiva does not behave according to the ways of the world, and his appearance is most unconventional \(2.26.14–16\).

Śiva and Satī retire to Śiva’s mountain abode and dally there for many years. Dakṣa in the meantime plans a great sacrifice and invites all divine beings of any importance, except Śiva and Satī. Śiva is quite undisturbed by this deliberate snub. Satī, however, is furious at the insult to her husband \(2.28\). She storms off to her father’s abode, where he snubs her. Outraged by the way in which her father has treated Śiva, she kills herself \(2.29–30\). Hearing the news of Satī’s death, Śiva becomes angry and creates Vīrabhadra and, in some versions of the mythology, other fierce beings. The demons proceed to Dakṣa’s sacrificial arena, where they defeat the assembled divine hosts and destroy the sacrifice. Dakṣa himself is usually said to be killed in the battle \(2.32–37\). Most versions of the story then tell of the reinstitution of the sacrifice and the resuscitation of Dakṣa \(2.42.21–31\). Śiva is included in the sacrifice along with the other gods, and the sacrifice proceeds smoothly \(2.43\).

In some versions of the myth, either before or after the reinstitution of the sacrifice, Śiva discovers Satī’s body. He picks her up and, sobbing in grief, carries her about the universe. This causes cosmic disruptions, and Viṣṇu is summoned to end Śiva’s grief. Viṣṇu follows the grieving Śiva about and gradually slices bits and pieces from Satī’s body until nothing remains. The pieces of her corpse fall to the earth; wherever a bit of her body lands a sacred place, called a *pīṭha*, is established, where goddesses of various names and types become the objects of worship.7 Realizing that Satī’s corpse has disappeared, Śiva ends his grief and returns to his mountain retreat, where he retires into ascetic aloofness. In some versions Śiva comes to earth in search of Satī. Finding her yoni established at Kāmarūpa in Assam,8 Śiva assumes the form of the *liṅga* and plunges himself into her, where the two remain conjoined permanently.9

In general terms the underlying theme or meaning of this myth seems fairly clear. The theme of Śiva’s alternation between the poles of asceticism and eroticism10 and the creative \(sometimes destructive\) tension that results from this alternation pervades the entire corpus of Śiva mythology. Underlying the mythology seems to be the assumption that Śiva’s stored-up potency, which accumulates during asceticism, should be released into the world to invigorate or enliven creation. In the logic of this mythology Satī plays the role of luring Śiva from ascetic isolation into creative participation in the world. This theme is further developed and embellished in the Pārvatī cycle of myths in which Śiva actually becomes involved in an ongoing family situation and becomes a divine householder.

In the Satī myths Śiva’s involvement in the world is most clearly suggested in the destruction and reinstitution of the sacrifice and his descent to earth to dwell with Satī’s yoni in the form of the liṅga. In the Vedic tradition Śiva is an ambiguous deity at best. He has many fearsome and inauspicious qualities, and when offerings are made to him they are made outside inhabited areas.11 The theme in the Satī myths of Śiva’s exclusion from the sacrifice thus has considerable historical justification. Śiva was undoubtedly a non-Āryan indigenous deity who was looked upon with considerable suspicion by the Brahman custodians of the sacrificial cult. His association with world renunciation, asceticism, and the powers of fertility as symbolized by the liṅga probably marked him as a deity who belonged to the fringes of society from the point of view of the Brahman establishment. The antagonism between Śiva and Dakṣa probably reflects this underlying conflict. Eventually, of course, Śiva became one of the most important and dynamic deities in the Hindu pantheon. The reinstitution of the sacrifice with Śiva included among those who partake of it probably represents his incorporation into established Brahman religion.

Satī’s devotion to Śiva and her outrage at the way he is treated eventually bring him within the sacrificial arena. He is indifferent to the doings of Dakṣa until Satī kills herself because of the insult to her husband. Satī comes from the realm of established religion, the order of dharma, and marries into the realm of asceticism, thus combining in herself the two opposing worlds. When she kills herself she precipitates a clash between these two worlds, between Dakṣa and Śiva, which is initially destructive but ultimately beneficial and creative. Satī’s role is as a mediating influence between the two religious poles, both affirmed to be central, in the Hindu tradition. Her ability to involve Śiva in the sacrifice makes Śiva, previously aloof from the world, accessible in the sacrificial cult, the primary point of which is to maintain and nourish the creation.

Satī performs a similar feat when her body is cut to pieces and falls to earth. By following her to earth and embedding himself in her yoni, Śiva is literally brought down to earth. Where previously he dwelled in the mountains and engaged in austerities, indifferent to the ongoing creation, he now is fully engaged in the creation as symbolized by the conjunction of the yoni and linga. Satī, in her role as mediator, has succeeded in involving the great ascetic god in the creation by transforming him into the great god of sexual power and vigor. Again, her role has been primarily that of making Śiva accessible to the world by attracting him to her in the form of the yoni. While Śiva may continue to perform heroic asceticism in his mountain retreat in one of his several forms, he continues to be accessible to the world in the form of the liṅga. In the myths of Satī, this is her triumph.

The establishment of centers of worship on earth where pieces of Satī’s body fell repeats the theme of making the divine accessible vis-à-vis Satī herself. In this myth the earth is sacralized \(the earth being understood primarily as the Indian subcontinent\). The earth itself is seen as the body of the goddess Satī. She becomes the earth and as such is made accessible to her devotees or to those who seek her powers.12

Satī’s death is thus transformative. Through her death she provokes Śiva into a direct conflict with the sacrificial cult and then an accommodation with it. In this way Śiva is brought within the circle of dharma, within the order of established religion. Similarly, Satī’s corpse, or pieces of her corpse, sacralize the earth. In dying she gives herself up to be accessible on earth to those who need her power or blessing. In transplanting or transforming herself into the earth, she also brings into the sphere of human society the invigorating power of Śiva in the form of the liṅga.

The Satī myth again reminds us of the archaic type of divine pair in which a male deity is associated with the sky and a female deity with the earth. Their union or marriage is necessary for life to be generated and sustained. Satī’s identification with the earth and Śiva’s identification with the distant Himalayas and their subsequent union as yoni and liṅga seem to be a variant on this theme. The main point of the Satī mythology is to bring about a marriage between these two deities so that creation may continue and prosper. The concluding chapter of Satī’s mythology makes it clear that this has been accomplished. In the form of the yoni \(all individual women\) she attracts Śiva \(all individual men\) eternally.

The goddess Satī is also associated with the practice of widow suicide in Hinduism.13 During the medieval period the custom of widows’ burning themselves to death on their husbands’ funeral pyres became accepted as the act of a faithful wife. The word *satī* \(suttee\) came to be applied to this practice. The term means “faithful wife,” and its relation to the goddess Satī is clear in the sense that Satī is portrayed as a faithful wife of Śiva. It is not altogether clear, however, that Satī’s suicide provides the mythological paradigm for suttee. Satī’s suicide, although provoked by an insult to her husband, causes her husband considerable grief and outrage. The whole point of suttee is for the widow to follow her dead husband. She affirms in this act that she cannot live without him, that her entire identity is bound up with his. Satī’s suicide, although perhaps the act of a faithful wife who cannot endure insults to her husband, results not in her maintaining a relationship with her husband but in her breaking that relationship.
