+++
title = "03 THE MYTHOLOGY OF PĀRVATĪ"

+++

Pārvatī’s name, which means “she who dwells in the mountains” or “she who is of the mountain,” and her many epithets, such as śailasutā \(daughter of the mountain peaks\), Giriputrī \(daughter of the mountains\), Girīśājaputrī \(daughter of the king of the mountains\), Girīśā \(mistress of the mountains\), identify her with mountainous regions. It is quite possible that Pārvatī’s early history and origin may lie with a goddess who dwelled in the mountains and was associated with non-Āryan tribal peoples. Such goddesses are sometimes referred to in Sanskrit texts.14 Such a goddess would be an appropriate mate for Śiva, himself a deity who dwells in mountainous regions and on the fringes of society. Indeed, Pārvatī herself is described as a female forester in the company of Śiva, who is also described as a forester in the *Mahābhārata* \(3.40.1–5\). For the most part, however, Pārvatī’s mythology does not describe her as a goddess associated with wild places or with people living on the fringes of culture. She is not usually included in lists of the group of goddesses called Mātṛkās \(mothers\), who are described as bloodthirsty, the bringers of disease, the speakers of foreign tongues, and fond of inaccessible places \(9.45\). If Pārvatī ever was associated with such a tradition, almost every trace of that identity is gone by the time we find her mentioned in the Hindu literary tradition.

Pārvatī’s mythology is almost entirely dominated by her association with Śiva. Her nature, too, develops or is characterized by her relationship with Śiva. Although in certain Śākta texts she is said to transcend Śiva and to subsume within herself all male deities15 or in other texts is identified with certain philosophic absolutes, for the most part these are late embellishments on her mythology and character and are the result of a theological effort on the part of devotees partial to various goddesses \(the Śāktas\) to assert the underlying unity of all goddesses.16 Pārvatī is primarily the goddess who is Śiva’s wife, she who won him as her husband after heroic efforts and who persuaded or provoked him into creating a child, who was necessary for the preservation of the world.

Most renditions of Pārvatī’s mythology explain the goddess’s birth as necessary for producing a child of Śiva.17 The demon Tāraka has been granted the boon of being invincible to any creature except a child of Śiva. As Śiva is an ascetic, the gods have to find a woman or goddess capable of luring Śiva into a sexual encounter or marriage. Pārvatī is usually understood to be a reincarnation of Satī and sometimes is described as consenting to be reborn for the help of the gods when she is petitioned by them.18 In some versions Pārvatī \(and Satī\) are understood to be manifestations of the supreme reality in the universe, the Mahādevī \(great goddess\), who condescends to incarnate herself for much the same reason that Viṣṇu does in his *avatāras*, to maintain the balance between dharma and *adharma*.19 Sometimes the reason given by Pārvatī for her birth is her desire to reward Menā, the wife of Himavat, for her great devotion to Pārvatī in her former life as Satī.20

Pārvatī, then, is born to Himavat and Menā. She is usually described as dark and in some versions is given the name Kālī, “the dark one,” because of her complexion.21 She is also described as very beautiful. In some accounts she shows a keen interest in Śiva from the outset, repeating his name to herself and taking delight in hearing about his appearance and deeds. While she is a child a sage comes to her home and after examining the marks on her body predicts that she will marry a naked yogi.22 When it becomes clear that she is destined to marry Śiva, her parents are usually described as feeling honored. Pārvatī is delighted, and she is sometimes said to remember Śiva from her past life as Satī.

At some point prior to or during Pārvatī’s attempts to attract Śiva’s attention for the purpose of marriage, the god Kāma is sent by the gods to awaken Śiva’s lust. When he attracts Śiva’s attention with sounds and scents of spring and tries to perturb Śiva with his intoxicating weapons, Śiva burns him to ashes with the fire from his middle eye. Although the gods and Pārvatī lament Kāma’s destruction, it is clear later in the story that Kāma’s powers were not destroyed when he was burned, for Śiva eventually falls in love with Pārvatī and recreates Kāma in bodily form at the request of Kāma’s wife, Rati.23

Pārvatī persists in her quest to win Śiva as her husband by setting out to perform austerities. One of the most effective ways to achieve what a person wants in traditional Hinduism is to perform *tapas*, “ascetic austerities.” If one is persistent and heroic enough, one will generate so much heat \(also called *tapas*\) that the gods will be forced to grant the ascetic a wish in order to save themselves and the world from being scorched. Pārvatī’s method of winning Śiva is thus a common approach to fulfilling one’s desires. It is also appropriate, however, in terms of demonstrating to Śiva that she can compete with him in his own realm, that she has the inner resources, control, and fortitude to cut herself off from the world and completely master her physical needs. By performing *tapas* Pārvatī abandons the world of the householder and enters the realm of the world renouncer, Śiva’s world. Most versions of the myth describe her as outdoing all the great sages in her austerities. She performs all the traditional mortifications, such as sitting in the midst of four fires in the middle of summer, remaining exposed to the elements during the rainy season and during the winter, living on leaves or air only, standing on one leg for years, and so on.24 Eventually she accumulates so much heat25 that the gods are made uncomfortable and go to Śiva to persuade him to grant Pārvatī’s wish so that she will cease her efforts.26

In some versions of the myth Pārvatī is tempted by an agent of Śiva, or by Śiva himself in disguise. She is told that Śiva’s appearance is terrible and that his habits are uncivilized and inauspicious.27 She is urged to desist from her desire to marry such a distasteful character. Pārvatī is never dissuaded from her purpose by these temptations, and as a result of her steadfastness Śiva agrees to marry her.

The marriage is duly arranged and elaborately undertaken. Śiva’s marriage procession, which includes most of the Hindu pantheon, is often described at length. A common motif during the marriage preparations is Menā’s outrage when she actually sees Śiva for the first time. She cannot believe that her beautiful daughter is about to marry such an outrageous-looking character; in some versions Menā threatens suicide and faints when told that the odd-looking figure in the marriage procession is indeed her future son-in-law.28

After the two are married they depart to Mount Kailasa, Śiva’s favorite dwelling place, and immerse themselves completely in sexual dalliance, which continues uninterruptedly for long periods of time. Their lovemaking is so intense that it shakes the cosmos, and the gods become frightened.29 In some versions the gods are also frightened at the prospect of what a child will be like from the union of two such potent deities. They fear the child’s extraordinary powers. For whichever reason \(sometimes the gods are simply impatient\), the gods interrupt Śiva and Pārvatī’s lovemaking. As a result Śiva spills his semen outside Pārvatī. The potent seed, which is extremely fiery and hot, passes from one container to another, the container varying in different versions of the myth, until it is finally contained in a suitable place, often the Ganges River, where it is incubated and born as the child Kārttikeya. Kārttikeya eventually finds his way back to his father and mother and by defeating the demon Tāraka rescues the world. Pārvatī accepts the child as her own, and sometimes we are told that her breasts ooze milk in affection for the child when she first sees him.30

A second child completes the divine family of Śiva and Pārvatī when Gaṇeśa is born. Pārvatī, desiring privacy, wishes to have a child of her own who will protect her from unwanted intrusions. She creates Gañeśa from the dirt and sweat of her body and commands him to guard the entrance to her house against any intruder. When Śiva himself tries to enter her apartments, Gaṇeśa refuses to admit him. Śiva becomes angry and decapitates the boy. Pārvatī is furious and demands that Gaṇeśa be restored to life. Śiva duly restores him to life by replacing his human head with an elephant head and puts him in charge of all his troops and heavenly attendants.31

For the most part Śiva and Pārvatī’s married and family life is portrayed as harmonious, blissful, and calm. In iconography the two are typically shown sitting in happy, intimate embrace.32 As a family the four deities are also typically shown in harmonious association.33 A scene of the divine family in a painting from the Kangra school of art shows the foursome seated around a fire. Kārttikeya and Pārvatī are helping each other thread a garland of skulls, while Śiva and Gaṇesa play idly with one of Śiva’s serpent ornaments.34 Many devotional hymns describe intimate family details, such as Kārttikeya’s playing with Śiva’s skull ornaments or mistaking Śiva’s crescent moon for a lotus bud.



He touches the garland made of skulls

in hope that they are geese

and shakes the crescent moon with eagerness to grasp

a lotus filament.

Thinking the forehead-eye a lotus flower,

he tries to pry it open.

May Skanda thus intent on play

within his father’s arms protect you.35

Śiva and Pārvatī do argue and insult each other from time to time. Bengali accounts of Śiva and Pārvatī often describe Śiva as an irresponsible, hemp-smoking husband who cannot look after himself. Pārvatī is portrayed as the long-suffering wife who complains from time to time to her mother but who always remains steadfast to her husband.36 Sometimes the outcome of a game of dice results in a quarrel, particularly when Śiva loses his loincloth to Pārvatī and she laughs at him. In another incident īiva becomes angry at her when she playfully covers his eyes with her hands from behind and the world is plunged into darkness.37 On another occasion Pārvatī feels pique when Śiva calls her by the nickname Kālī \(blackie\), which Pārvatī takes as a slur on her appearance. She resolves to rid herself of her dark complexion and does so by performing austerities.38 Having assumed a golden complexion she then becomes known by the name Gaurī \(the bright or golden one\). In some versions of the myth her discarded, dark complexion or sheath gives birth to or becomes a warrior goddess who undertakes heroic feats of combat against demons.39



Pārvatī with Gaṇeśa. Pratapaditya Pal, *Indo-Asian Art from the John Gilmore Ford Collection* \(Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1971\), fig. 51. Reprinted by permission of the Walters Art Gallery.

The presence of an alter ego or a dark, violent side to Pārvatī is suggested in several myths in which demons threaten the cosmos and Pārvatī is asked to help the gods by defeating the demon in question. Typically, when Pārvatī grows angry at the prospect of war, a violent goddess is born from her wrath and proceeds to fight on Pārvatī’s behalf. This deity is often identified as the bloodthirsty goddess Kālī.40 For the most part, however, the myths emphasize Pārvatī’s milder side. So out of character is Pārvatī on the battlefield that another goddess, it seems, must be summoned to embody her wrath and dissociate this fury from Pārvatī herself.
