+++
title = "05 DEVOTION AND GRACE"

+++

Another important facet of Pārvatī is her role as a model of devotion to Śiva, as the devotee of the Lord par excellence. At several points in her mythology Pārvatī is described as devoted to Śiva, as unswerving in her attachment to him, and as incapable of being dissuaded from doting on him despite the most outrageous reports concerning his uncivilized, bizarre habits.76 Her remarkably steadfast, indeed, stubborn, devotion to him is most obvious during her long period of asceticism when she undertakes heroic bodily mortifications in order either to be granted the boon of having Śiva for her husband or to attract the attention of Śiva himself.77 In these scenes Pārvatī is portrayed as a devotee who seeks Śiva’s attention and blessing; it is easy to see how she might become the paradigm for devotees of Śiva, which she does, for example, in the devotional hymns of Māṇikkavācakar, a śaivite saint from Tamilnad.

Pārvatī appears in Māṇikkavācakar’s hymns in the role of the ideal devotee, or in a position that the devotee longs to achieve, in at least two ways. First, Māṇikkavācakar uses the imagery of a love relationship, casting himself in the role of a woman who longs for her lover or husband, Śiva. In placing himself \(and by extention other devotees\) in this role, he identifies himself with Śiva’s beloved, Pārvatī, who thus becomes the model, or vehicle, for devotion.78 In this role Māṇikkavācakar imagines himself, along with women and goddesses, to be doing domestic chores for “her” husband.79 Māṇikkavācakar approaches Śiva by assuming the role and duties of Pārvatī. In this way he is able to relate to Śiva in a most intimate way. Second, Māṇikkavācakar refers several times to the half-male, half-female image of Śiva and Pārvatī and sees in it the ultimate goal of the devotee, to be inextricably united with Śiva. In his longing to be with Śiva, to be consumed by and overcome by his Lord, Māṇikkavācakar sees in this image his desire graphically realized by Pārvatī.80

Another facet of Pārvatī is evident in Tamil śaivism. Pārvatī tends to have a calming, civilizing effect on Śiva. Under her influence or in her presence, Śiva is often tamed, distracted from his wild, rude, mad behavior. In Māṇikkavācakar’s hymns, for example, Śiva never appears before Pārvatī in his outrageous forms, such as the dancer in the cremation ground or the destroyer of Daksa’s sacrifice.81 In her presence, it seems, such behavior is inappropriate, and Śiva almost always behaves in properly domestic ways when she is present. Becalmed, Śiva is more attentive to the needs of his devotees \(and to the needs and desires of his spouse\) and more prone to grant them blessings. As the domesticator of Śiva, as the one who is able to distract him from his antisocial behavior and make him turn his attention to the world and to his devotees within the world, Pārvatī may be understood as playing the role of a mediator between the devotee and Śiva. She is a mediator in the sense that she is the one who awakens his grace or the one who is the key to activating his grace. Immersed in yoga, preoccupied with asceticism, dancing wildly with his ghastly companions in the cremation ground, Śiva is indifferent to his spouse, to the world, and to his devotees. In the presence of Pārvatī, in his role as her husband or Lord, Śiva is attentive to the world and to his devotees.

Although Pārvatī’s role as intermediary is never developed in śaivism to the extent that Śrī-Lakṣmī’s role is developed in Śrī Vaiṣṇavism, Pārvatī does comes to be identified with Śiva’s grace in śaiva Siddhanta, a Tamil śaivite school of thought and devotion.82 In this school Śiva’s grace \(*aruḷ*\) is said to play an active role, indeed, almost to have an identity of its own or an independent function. In its active role it is referred to as *aruḷ-catti \(aruḷ-śakti\),* “the power of grace.” This power is sometimes personified, and when it is, it is identified with Pārvatī.83 Furthermore, the *aruḷ-catti* is often said to reside inherently in every human being. Devotion is the means by which this power is awakened and provoked. The implication is that Pārvatī, in subtle form, resides within every human being.84 She is awakened by means of devotion to Śiva, which expresses her most essential nature. Having been awakened, she infuses the devotee with her great devotion to Śiva, and thus the two, Pārvatī and the devotee, merge into one. So it is that Pārvatī’s roles as ideal devotee and as Śiva’s personified grace also merge into a unity.

Finally, Pārvatī often plays the role of the student in relation to Śiva. In many texts,85 especially *Tantras*,86 Pārvatī inquires of Śiva concerning a great many subjects: ritual, meditation, mythology, dharma, and philosophy. At her prompting or in response to her queries, Śiva reveals everything from the particulars of esoteric Tantric rituals to the nondual wisdom of Vedānta. Again, it is Pārvatī who succeeds in capturing Śiva’s attention, in awakening his concern for the world, so that his great wisdom and knowledge, gained by his heroic eons of yogic meditation and brooding, can be revealed. In the role of curious student Pārvatī represents human beings who are anxious for and will benefit from all that Śiva reveals. In her role as student she again might be seen as a kind of mediator, one who coaxes from Śiva what is ultimately beneficial for human beings. Although Pārvatī is not the only one to whom Śiva gives instruction, she is by far the most common figure to be cast in this role.



