+++
title = "1 The Mahāvidyās as a Group"

+++



## The Ten Mahāvidyās

The order in which the Mahavidyas are given varies somewhat, as do the goddesses included in the group. In contemporary sources, however, the following goddesses in the following order are most common: \(1\) Kali, \(2\) Tārā, \(3\) Tripura-sundari \(Sodasi\), \(4\) Bhuvanesvari, \(5\) Chinnamasta, \(6\) Bhairavi, \(7\) Dhumavati, \(8\) Bagalāmukhī, \(9\) Matangi, and \(10\) Kamala. The ten are described in most sources as follows:

1. Kali is black, which in fact is what her name means. She has a fierce countenance, stands on the supine body of the god Siva, and has four arms. Her upper left hand holds a bloodied cleaver and her lower left hand a severed head. Her right upper hand makes the sign "fear not," and her lower right hand makes the gesture of bestowing boons. She is naked, apart from a garland of severed heads and a girdle of severed arms; her hair is unbound and disheveled; and she is often standing in a cremation ground or on a battlefield. She is almost always mentioned as the first of the Mahavidyas and occupies a preeminent place in the group. In some texts and in some settings, the other Mahavidyas are understood to arise from her and to be her different forms.

2. Tārā is usually given as the second Mahavidya, and in appearance she is similar to Kali. She is dark; her left foot is placed on a corpse or on Siva; she wears a tiger skin; her hair is tied in a long braid; she is potbellied and has four arms. In her left hands she holds a knife and a severed head, and her right hands make the signs of giving favors and granting fearlessness. She often stands in the midst of a cremation fire.





3. Sodasl \(also known as Tripura-sundari, Lalita, and Rajarajesvari\) is a beautiful young girl of sixteen with a red complexion. She is sometimes shown astride Siva in sexual intercourse. They are on a pedestal or couch supported by the gods Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and Indra. Some descriptions say that the four gods who support her pedestal are Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, and Yama. Sometimes she is said to sit on a lotus that emerges from the navel of Siva, who is reclining below her. Her four arms hold a noose, goad, bow, and arrows.

4. Bhuvanesvarl, who is said to nourish the three worlds, holds a piece of fruit in one of her four hands, makes the sign of assurance with another, and holds a goad and a noose in the other two. Her breasts are large and ooze milk. She has a bright, light complexion and smiles pleasantly.

5. Chinnamasta has cut off her own head with a sword. I Ier left hand supports her head on a platter, and her right hand holds the sword with which she cut it off. Three jets of blood gush from her neck: one stream enters the mouth of her severed head; the other two jets enter the mouths of two female companions. Chinnamasta stands on the copulating bodies of the goddess Rati and her husband Kama, the god of sexual lust. They in turn are lying on a lotus or sometimes a cremation pyre. Sometimes Chinnamasta \(with her head chopped off\) is shown astride Siva, copulating with him as he lies beneath her. Her hair is loose, and she is naked.

6. Bhairavi has a fierce appearance; her primary role in the cosmic process is destruction. Her complexion is said to be as bright as thousands of rising suns. She wears a garland of skulls and clothes made from the skins of demons she has killed; her feet and breasts are covered with blood. Her four hands hold a rosary and a book and make the signs of fearlessness and granting wishes. The *Kalika-purdna *says that her eyes roll from intoxication and that she stands on a corpse.1

7. Dhumavati is tall, with a pale complexion and a stern, unsmiling face. She is dressed as a widow, in white clothes with no adornments. Her clothes are dirty and her hair disheveled. She is toothless, her breasts long and pendulous, and her nose large and crooked. She is hungry and thirsty, has a quarrelsome nature, and rides a crow or is seated on a chariot. She holds a winnowing basket and sometimes a trident.

8. Bagalamukhl, "she who has the head of a crane," usually sits on a throne of jewels, which is sometimes in the midst of a body of water. She is dressed in a yellow *sari. *In one hand she holds a club, with which she is about to beat a dark-complexioned enemy. With another hand she is pulling his tongue. Sometimes she sits on a corpse, and in some cases she has a crane's head, or a crane is her vehicle, or *vdhana. *





9. Matarigi has several different forms. Usually she is a beautiful young woman with a dark or black complexion. The moon adorns her long hair, and she sits on a jeweled throne. She wears a beautiful robe and a garland of flowers. Her four hands hold a goad, noose, sword, and club. Her eyes are described as intoxicated from passion.

10. Kamala is a beautiful young woman with a golden complexion. Two elephants flank her and pour pitchers of water on her while she sits on a lotus and holds lotuses in her hands. She is clearly a form of the goddess Laksmi, one of whose common epithets is Kamala, "lotus."

This list of the Mahavidyas is not unvarying. Lists or depictions of the Mahavidyas almost always include Kali, Tārā, Chinnamasta, Bagalamukhl, Tripura-sundari \(Sodasl\), and Dhumavati, but the others are sometimes excluded. At times, well-known goddesses such as Durga, Annapurna \(she who is full of food\), and Kamakhya \(she whose eyes express desire\) may be included in the list, which is the case in the *Camunda**tantra.2 *At other times obscure goddesses such as Vasali, Bala, and Pratyarigiras will be included.3 In addition, the order in which the Mahavidyas are given varies, although Kali is almost always named as the first of the group and Tārā as the second.4 The number of Mahavidyas also varies. The *Niruttara-tantra *lists eighteen Mahavidyas,5 while the *Ndrada**pancardtra *says that there are seven million Mahavidyas.6



## Typical Literary and Iconographic Contexts

The Mahavidyas are prominent primarily in tantric literature and in a few late *sakta **purdnas *and *upa **purdnas *\(minor, later, or subsidiary *purdnas\). *The *tantras *contain little narrative material about the Mahavidyas. They are primarily interested in providing the details of how to worship the Mahavidyas and do not dwell on the meaning of their symbolism or stories that feature them. A typical tantric treatment of a Mahavidya includes, first, her mantra, which is believed to represent her essence; a devotee seeking the goddess's blessing or power must repeat it continually. Next, the goddess's *dhydna *\(meditation\) mantra describes her physical appearance in some detail; again, the devotee is to fill his or her mind with this description of the goddess while ritually approaching her. The text also gives the goddess's *rahasya *\(essence or secret\), which is usually similar to her *dhydna *mantra. It also lists her *kvaca *\(armor\), usually in the form of a prayer to protect her devotee on all sides. A *tantra *usually includes the goddess's *name **stotra, *a list of her names or epithets. Sometimes it describes her yantra \(a schematic drawing generally composed of circles, triangles, and stylized lotuses\), along with directions for constructing and meditating upon it. In addition to this, the text sometimes gives directions for routine *piijd *\(worship\), in which various items are offered to the goddess.





In *purdnic *literature, only a few late texts mention the Mahavidyas. They do, however, contain fairly detailed stories about the origin of the Mahavidyas as a group. These myths are important in providing interpretive contexts for the group as a whole.

Certain goddess hymns also mention the Mahavidyas. For example, they are named in the *Durgd-cdlisd, *a famous hymn of forty verses to the goddess Durga. They are also mentioned in the *Kdmdkhyd-cdlisd. *A hymn to the goddess Gariga says that the Mahavidyas Tārā, Dhumavati, Matarigi, and Bhairavi are her manifestations.7 The purpose of their inclusion in such hymns is to demonstrate that the main deity being praised—for example, Durga, Kamakhya, or Gariga—appears in many forms throughout the world and that all goddesses are simply her manifestations.

Iconographically, the Mahavidyas are often shown as a group in goddess temples. Their images are usually painted on the temple walls; more uncommonly, they may be represented by stone or metal images. Sometimes the presiding goddess of the temple in which the Mahavidyas are depicted is herself one of them. In the Kali-bari temple dedicated to the goddess Kali in Simla, for example, the Mahavidyas are painted on the walls surrounding the *garbha **grha, *the inner shrine room, which houses an image of Daksina-kali. Kali herself is depicted among the Mahavidyas.8 In a temple to Dhumavati in Varanasi, similarly, the Mahavidyas are painted on the interior of the outer walls and include the usual group. Again in Varanasi, at the Laksmi Kund temple, the images of the Mahavidyas are painted around the inside door frame of the main entrance to the temple and include Kamala \(a form of Laksmi\).

In other cases, the Mahavidyas are depicted in temples dedicated to goddesses who are not among the Mahavidyas. Images of the Mahavidyas are carved on pillars of a gate at Naina-devi temple in the district of Bilaspur in Himachal Pradesh. They are shown on the interior walls of a temple dedicated to Carai-devi-mata in Siddhapur on the outskirts of Dharmsala in Himachal Pradesh. Caral-devi is a local deity; her temple was established by truckers who sought the goddess's protection for their union building. At a Camunda-devi temple located about fifteen kilometers from Dharmsala, the Mahavidyas are painted on the interior walls of the central shrine. An inscription states that the goddesses have been depicted according to the *Sdkta-pramoda, *a well-known text that describes the Mahavidyas. When I asked why the Mahavidyas were depicted in the temple, the priest replied that Camunda-devi was a form of Kali, the chief of the Mahavidyas. In his mind, then, this temple is an example of the type in which the Mahavidyas appear as a group in a temple dedicated to one of them. Hindu texts, however, almost always distinguish Camundadevl from Kall, and they are different in appearance.





Two other temples whose primary deity is not a Mahavidya are interesting because they are related to Sati and the origin of the Mahavidyas. The temple of Jvalamukhl-devl in Himachal Pradesh prominently depicts the Mahavidyas on the walls of a large pavilion, separate from the main shrine, which houses an image of Durga.9 Jvalamukhl-devi's temple is said to be the place where the goddess Sati's tongue fell when her body was chopped up by Visnu and so is one of the *sakta **pFthas, *sacred goddess sites scattered all over India.10 As this is the case, Jvalamukhi is associated with Satl, who, as we shall see below, is said to be the origin of the Mahavidyas in certain mythological accounts of their origin. Similarly, the famous Kamakhya-devi shrine near Gauhati in Assam is said to be the place where Sati's yoni \(vulva\) fell to earth. The hillside on which the main shrine is located has small shrines to each of the Mahavidyas.

At the Bajresvari-devl temple in Kangra, large paintings in an alcove called the *sakti **bhavan *show the Mahavidyas. The Amber Fort, about eleven kilometers east of Jaipur in Rajasthan, has a temple to Sila-devl; a large double door at the main entrance to the temple depicts the ten Mahavidyas.11 In the Durga Saptasatl temple in Nagawa, just south of Varanasi, they are painted in a row on one of the inner walls of the main shrine.12 The Mahavidyas are also shown in bas-relief on the exterior walls of the temple at the Ramakrishna Math in Varanasi.

Temples dedicated to the group of Mahavidyas themselves are rare, in my experience. Indeed, I have been able to find only one. In the section of north Calcutta known as Cossipore, near the cremation ground on the Hoogly River, is a small temple dedicated to the Dasamahavidyas. It contains ten *\(dasa\) *images of the Mahavidyas. Sodasl is in the center and is larger than the rest. On her right, from the most distant to the closest, are Bagala, Matarigl, Kamala, and Dhumavatl. On her left, from closest to farthest, are Kali, Tārā, Bhuvaneśvarī, Bhairavi, and Chinnamasta. The temple enshrines several *lirigams *\(phalluses\), connoting the presence of Siva and suggesting his connection with the Mahavidyas.





The presence of the Mahavidyas at the Kamakhya temple at Kamarupa in Assam is unusual in the abundance and variety of images throughout the site.13 This temple is an important *sakta *center according to many texts, because it is the place where Sati's yoni fell to earth, and hence her *adi **pitha *\(primordial or original seat\). It is also strongly associated with the Mahavidyas. Stone yonis in the main temple represent the Mahavidyas Sodasi, Matarigl, and Kamala. Indeed, some informants identify Kamakhya herself with Sodasi. The other Mahavidyas \(and other goddesses as well\) have small shrines or temples located nearby.14 Several of these smaller shrines are associated with Siva *lingams. *The Tara temple is quite large and resembles the central shrine. The Bhairavi shrine has images of the other nine Mahavidyas on the walls near the ceiling. The central representations of the Mahavidyas in these shrines usually are not anthropomorphic and are sometimes difficult to see at all, as they are obscured by flowers, clothing, or offerings or are located in underground caves that are open for *darsan *\(viewing by devotees\) only on special occasions. Sometimes this representation is a yoni and is associated with a spring \(as in the main shrine as well\).





The Mahavidyas are prominent iconographically in two large goddess festivals in Bengal, Durga Puja \(Navaratra\) and Kali Puja \(Divali\). During Durga Puja, artisans construct thousands of large clay images featuring Durga as Mahisamardini \(the slayer of the buffalo demon Mahisa\). These images are usually part of an elaborate tableau that includes the goddesses Sarasvati and Laksmi and the gods Ganesa and Kartikeya. Traditional renditions of this divine tableau have a halolike panel called the *cal citra *\(literally, "roof picture"\) behind and encircling the central image of Durga. This frame depicts deities or scenes from Hindu mythology. It often shows the Mahavidyas, giving the unmistakable impression that they are different forms of the goddess Durga.

During Kali Puja, devotees establish clay images of Kali all over Bengal. The images are often set in a tableau featuring Siva, Ramakrishna, and Bamakhepa \(two famous Bengali Kali devotees\) or some aspect of Kali mythology or iconography. In recent years, Kali's tableau has included the other Mahavidyas. I saw two examples of this during Kali Puja in October 1992. Both sets of Mahavidya images were set up in central Calcutta, and both featured Kali in the center of the row often goddesses. Her image was far larger than the others; it was clear that she held the preeminent position. Indeed, a man at one of *the **pandals *referred to the Mahavidyas as "the ten Kalis." For the most part, the images were faithful duplications of the tantric *dhyana *mantras that describe the appearance of the Mahavidyas.15



## The Mahāvidyās as Forms of the Mahādevī

Both literary and iconographic materials give the general impression that the ten Mahavidyas are different forms of an overarching, transcendent female reality, who is usually referred to simply as the Mahadevi \(great goddess\). An underlying assumption of many *sakta *texts is that the highest reality is the Great Goddess, and this infinitely great being manifests herself in a wide variety of forms. Indeed, this is perhaps the central feature of Hindu *sdkta *theology in those texts.16 Many myths in *sakta *literature describe a goddess, or the goddess, as producing other goddesses from her own body. In such cases she often announces that she assumes different forms at different times to maintain cosmic stability,17 to bless a particular devotee, or out of a sense of sport or playfulness. The theological idea is that ultimate reality, which is female in essence and form, displays herself in a great variety of ways for different purposes. Some texts even say that wherever a female being exists, there the goddess reveals herself, being present in every female form.18 This theme is strong and obvious in the case of the Mahavidyas. Their presence in *devi *temples seems to state: "The goddess enshrined in this place assumes many forms." The Mahavidyas are the concrete expression of the idea of "many forms." In the case of goddesses who are identified with a particular place, and who are not well known outside their local areas, association with the Mahavidyas lends them a cosmic, universal, transcendent dimension. The presence of the Mahavidyas in a goddess temple identifies a local or regional goddess with an all-India mythology or symbolic structure, lending her a certain prestige.





There is evidence that the ten *avataras *\("descents" or incarnations\) of Visnu are the model for the ten Mahavidyas as expressions of the Mahadevi; that is, the Mahavidyas represent, at least to some extent, a *sakta *version of the Vaisnava idea. Comparison of the Mahavidyas to the *avataras *of Visnu places a premium on their role as maintaining and sustaining the cosmic and moral orders. Individually and as a group, their positive, world-supporting natures are emphasized. The *Guhyatiguhya**tantra, *for example, lists the Mahavidyas and identifies each with one of Visnu's *avataras: *Kali is said to have become Krsna, Chinnamasta to have become Narasimha, and so on.19 The *Todala-tantra, *in chapter II, also equates the ten Mahavidyas with the ten *avataras.20 *An article on Tārā in Hindi says that the ten *avataras *come from the fingernails of the Mahadevi and that the Mahavidyas, which are also her forms, are like the *avataras *in that they are created to help overcome *adhamna *\(evil or immorality\).21 The *Mundamdla-tantra *compares the ten Mahavidyas to the ten *avataras.22 *A contemporary Hindi work also compares the Mahavidyas to the *avataras.23 *Another contemporary Hindi work on Tantra says that the Mahadevi takes on different forms from time to time to defeat demons, and the Mahavidyas are such forms.24 Iconographically the two groups are also associated. At the temple at the Ramakrishna Math in Varanasi, the ten *avatdras *are sculpted on two exterior walls, five to a side. The Mahavidyas are on the other two walls. The juxtaposition of the two groups suggests that the Mahavidyas are the female counterparts of the ten *avatdras. *





A *sakta *devotee and teacher in Varanasi, Swami Sadhananda Shastri, told me that the Mahavidyas correspond to the *"avatdras" *\(I put the term in quotations because several of the examples of male deities that he mentioned are not actually Visnu *avatdras\): *Bagalamukhl is Vamana, Kamala is Visnu, Kali is Krsna, Tārā is Rama, Bhairavi is Rudra, Chinnamasta is Matsya, Matarigl is Brahma, Dhumavatl is Varaha, Sodasi is Siva, and Bhuvaneśvarī is the formless *brahman *\(the absolute\). He stated that, like the *avatdras *of Visnu, the Mahavidyas were created to play positive functions in the world. Tārā, for example, was created to defeat the thousand-headed Ravana, who appeared after Rama's defeat of the tenheaded Ravana. The thousand-headed Ravana could be slain only by a woman, and so the Great Goddess took the form of Tārā to kill him. Kali was created to eat and drink the blood of demons who threaten the world, and Chinnamasta, he said, was created to delude the demons at the churning of the ocean so that they would not get their share of the nectar of immortality. Chinnamasta took their share of the nectar, drank it, and then killed herself so that they were deprived of it. Sodasi was created to arouse Siva to sexual activity so his creative powers could stimulate the world. Bhuvaneśvarī was created to save the world when it was taken under the waters of the cosmic ocean and thus plays the same role as the boar *avatdra *of Visnu. Kamala was created to spread wealth in the world. Matarigi, who is the same as Sarasvatl, according to Swami Shastri, was created to spread music and education and to help human beings acquire liberating wisdom *\(jndna\). *Bagalamukhl was created to paralyze enemies. Dhumavatl was created to spread disease. Although this may not seem a very positive cosmic role, we might suppose that Dhumavatl spreads disease to punish the wicked and support the moral order.25

Although an important aspect of *sdkta *theology stresses the place of the Mahadevl in upholding the cosmic order and the Mahavidyas are sometimes likened to Visnu's *avatdras *as playing positive cosmic roles, the Mahavidyas seem only tenuously connected to this type of activity in most tantric and *puranic *texts that mention them. In most cases, as we shall see, the emphasis seems to be not so much on maintaining cosmic order and defeating demons as on the diversity of forms the Mahadevl assumes and, by implication, the insistence that, through her many forms, she pervades all aspects of reality. That there are ten Mahavidyas as a group, however, does seem best explained on the analogy of the ten *avataras *of Vishnu, which is an ancient, well-known, and popular feature of Hindu mythology. In fact, this explanation is supported by certain texts and by present-day informants.





## Mahāvidyā Origin Myths

I have come across five versions of the origin of the Mahavidyas as a group. In one of these versions, the Mahavidyas are different forms of the goddess Sati; in a second version they are forms of the goddess Parvati; in a third they arise from the goddess Kali, herself one of the Mahavidyas; in a fourth they are forms of the goddess Durga; and in a fifth they are said to arise from the goddess Sataksi, who is also identified with Sakambhari and Durga.



### 1. THE MAHĀVIDYĀS AS FORMS OF SATĪ

Of the five versions of the Mahavidyas' origin, I have found only two that are firmly attested in literary sources. We shall look first at the most detailed version. In the *Mahabhagavata-purana *and the *Brhad**dhanna-purana, *which are both late *sakta **upa **puranas, *probably written in eastern India after the fourteenth century Ce., the origin of the ten Mahavidyas is recounted as part of the story of Daksa's sacrifice. This tale is ancient in the Hindu tradition and well known all over India. It is also an important *sakta *myth, being the prelude to the story of the origin of the *sakta **pithas, *which are sacred centers of goddess worship throughout India.26 In early versions of the story, the Mahavidyas do not appear; they enter it for the first time in these two relatively *late **puranas. *By including their origin in this myth, of course, the authors of these texts have lent the Mahavidyas considerable prestige, as the myth is well known and central to *sakta *mythology.

The account of the origin of the Mahavidyas in the *Brhaddharma- *and *Mahabhagavata-puranas *is as follows.27 Once upon a time, Daksa decided to undertake a great sacrifice. He invited all the inhabitants of heaven, all the gods and goddesses, except his daughter, Sati, and his son-in-law, Siva. Daksa was not fond of Siva, as he disapproved of Siva's odd habits and antisocial nature. Siva, the archetypal yogi, was fond of inhabiting lonely places and cremation grounds and surrounding himself with ghosts and goblins. When he was not going about completely naked, he wore animal hides. I Ic often smeared his body with ashes and spent time in isolated meditation. To Daksa, he did not seem a fitting husband for his daughter, and so Daksa deliberately did not invite him or Sati to his sacrifice. Siva himself was indifferent to this snub, but Sati was outraged and determined to attend her father's sacrifice in order to disrupt it and berate her father. Siva, however, forbade her to go.





Now the story departs from earlier versions by introducing in an account of the origin of the Mahavidyas. Forbidden by Siva to attend the sacrifice, Sati becomes enraged and accuses him of neglecting her. In her anger her eyes become red and bright and her limbs tremble. Seeing her fury, Siva closes his eyes. When he opens them, a fearsome female stands before him. As he looks at her, she becomes very old, her graceful appearance disappearing. She develops four arms, her complexion becomes fiery and her hair disheveled, her lips are smeared with sweat, and her tongue lolls out and begins to wave from side to side. She is naked except for a garland of severed heads; she wears the half moon as a crown. Standing before Siva, she blazes like a million rising suns and fills the world with earth-shattering laughter.

Siva is afraid and tries to flee. He runs around in all directions, but then the terrible goddess gives a dreadful laugh, and Siva is too petrified to move. To make sure that he does not flee from her terrible form, Sati fills the directions around him with ten different forms \(the Mahavidyas\). In the *Mababhdgavata-purana, *when Siva asks who these goddesses are, Sati answers that they are her "friends."28 Wherever Siva goes or looks, he sees a dreadful figure, and his fear increases. Unable to flee, he stands still and closes his eyes. When he opens them, he sees before him a smiling woman whose face is as pleasing as a lotus blossom. She is black, her breasts are large, and she is naked. Her hair is disheveled, and she glows with the brilliance of a million suns. Siva asks: "Where is my beloved Sati?" She replies: "Do you not see Sati standing before you?"

Siva then asks who the other goddesses are who surround him and is told their names: Kali, Tārā, Kamala, Bhuvanesvarl, Chinnamasta, Sodasl, Sundari, Bagalamukhl, Dhumavatl, and Matarigi. In relation to Siva, who is facing south, Kali is in front of him \(to the south\), Tārā above him, Chinnamasta to his right \(west\), Bhuvaneśvarī to his left \(east\), Bagala behind him \(north\), Dhumavatl to the southeast, Tripura-sundari to the southwest, Matarigi to the northwest, and Sodasl to the northeast.29 At one point, the *Mahabhagavata-purmia *\(77.4-11\) locates the Mahavidyas relative to the goddess Kamakhya, who is identified with Kali. Kamakhya \(or Kali\) is in the center, seated on a corpse that is lying on a lotus that is resting on a lion. The text identifies the corpse as Siva, the lotus as Brahma, and the lion as Visnu, so the goddess is supported by the three great male deities of the Hindu pantheon. The Mahavidyas are arrayed around the central figure, who faces south.30 None of these enumerations of the Mahavidyas elaborates their individual appearances or characteristics. The *Brhaddharma-purana *does say that Tārā represents time and that Chinnamasta is emaciated and dreadful,31 but for the most part the two texts content themselves with making general comments about the group as a whole.





In both accounts, Satl, in her terrible, black form, which is sometimes said to be Kall, tells Siva that these ten goddesses are her different forms. "All these figures are my excellent forms, and I abide in manifold forms."32 In the *Brhaddharma-purana *the Mahavidyas as a group are said to cause trouble and conflict among people, but also to give spiritual liberation *\(moksa\).33 *They are also said to bestow the powers *oimdrana *\(the ability to cause a person's death simply by willing it\), *uccatana *\(the ability to make one's enemy sick by willing it\), *stambhana *\(the ability to immobilize a person\), the power to control another's speech, the power of remaining young oneself while causing another to grow old, and the power to attract another to oneself.34 The *Brhaddharma-purana *also says that when Brahma creates the world and Visnu maintains it, they use the powers of the Mahavidyas "like two arms."35 These references suggest that the Mahavidyas are associated with magical powers, which may be acquired by worshiping them.

After the Mahavidyas have surrounded Siva and he has been told who they are, he acquiesces to Sati's wish and says that she may attend her father's sacrifice. In the *Mahabhdgavata-purdna, *Tārā merges with Kali at this point, and the other forms disappear.36 Satl, in the form of Kali, then goes off to Daksa's sacrifice and kills herself by throwing herself on the sacrificial fire. In the *Brhaddharma-purana *account, Sati leaves the Mahavidyas behind with Siva, instructing them to look after him in her absence. She explains that she has created these forms to attend Siva when she is away.37 Then Satl, taking on a form that wears a tiger skin and has disheveled hair, a fearsome face, and fiery red eyes, heads off to Daksa's sacrifice, flying through the sky. The rest of the story conforms to the account in the *Mahdbhdgavata-purdna. *

In the version of the origin of the Mahavidyas that is given in the *Brhad**dharma- *and *Mahabhagavata-puranas, *there are several important points to be noted.

First, the myths make clear that Satl, or the goddess in the form of Satl, is a superior power to Siva. He forbids her to attend her father's sacrifice, but she forces him to let her go by overwhelming him with her numerous and terrible forms. Both accounts of the story stress the fact that Siva is afraid of the goddess in her terrible forms and tries to flee. The fact that the goddess is able to physically restrain Siva dramatically makes the point that she is superior in power. The theme of the superiority of the goddess over male deities is common in *sakta *texts, so the story is stressing a central *sakta *theological principle.





Second, the *Brhaddharma- *and *Mahahhagavata-purana *account of the origin of the Mahavidyas stresses their terrifying aspects. Although other texts describe some of the Mahavidyas as pleasant, beautiful, and mild of manner, here they are, as a group, awful and frightening. The one goddess the story does describe in detail, the initial form taken by Satl, is particularly fearsome, and Siva reacts to it by closing his eyes or trying to run away. This account stresses the dramatic effects the Mahavidyas have on Siva. He is frightened and repelled by them. They are terrible, not pleasing, in form.

Third, this version of the Mahavidyas' origin emphasizes that the ten goddesses are manifestations of Satl, or of the Great Goddess, who has taken the form of Sati. When Siva asks who the Mahavidyas are, Satl tells him they are her forms or her friends. The myth makes clear that the Mahavidyas are extensions of Sati's power. They embody her will and wrath and succeed in bending Siva to her wishes.

Fourth, the appearance of the Mahavidyas takes place in the context of husband-wife and father-daughter tensions. Daksa insults his daughter by not inviting her to his home for the sacrifice, and Siva offends her by not allowing her to go to her paternal home. The Mahavidyas are, at least to some extent, the embodiments of an offended wife and daughter. They are the embodiments of female fury precipitated by male neglect and abuse.

The cult of the goddess Nanda-devi of Garwahl in Himachal Pradhesh illustrates the potential danger posed by unfairly restricting a woman's freedom to return to her native village \(the domain of her father\), whether the impediments are caused by the father or the husband. Although local Garwahli literature stresses that a woman is totally transformed when she marries, becoming part of her husband's lineage, Garwahli women insist that females remain strongly identified with, influenced by, and related to their home families and villages, their *maits. *Both men and women share the belief that a woman has the ability to effectively curse her husband or her father if she is impeded from maintaining contact with her home village. The bride who has gone away, the "outmarried village daughter" *\(dhiydni\), *should continue to be respected by her home village and must be invited back for all its important festivals and events. A village that neglects to do this risks her destructive curse, which could be ruinous. In the cult of the goddess Nanda-devl, a yearly pilgrimage wends its way through many local villages where she is worshiped, and this represents her return to her native village. If this pilgrimage is not undertaken, the goddess will be offended and assume that she is no longer loved and respected. Such implied neglect or indifference would court her wrath.38





A similar situation exists in the story of Sati. Her *wait *is not fulfilling its duty to her, because her father has not invited her home for his elaborate sacrifice. Furthermore, her husband, in forbidding her to return to her home village, is showing her serious disrespect. Both Siva and Daksa become the targets of her anger. In the logic of the Nanda-devi cult, Satl returns to her home village enraged at her father's lack of respect for her and immolates herself in her father's sacrificial fire. He and his home are cursed and eventually destroyed by Siva and his hosts when Siva hears of Sati's death.

A fifth important point about this version of the origin of the Mahavidyas is that these goddesses are associated with magical powers and have little or no connection with upholding the order of dharma.39 They do not resemble the *avataras *of Visnu in either nature or function. They do not appear in order to defeat demons who threaten the stability of the world but in order to frighten Siva into allowing Satl to attend her father's sacrifice. Their primary role in the story is to overpower an opponent, in this case, Siva. The *Brhaddharma-purana *says that the Mahavidyas have been created to produce conflict and trouble among people40 and that they confer the power to kill at will, to immobilize one's enemies, and so on. Indeed, the effect they have on Siva underlines this aspect of their nature. Siva is alternately frightened into fleeing and frozen with fear. Although other myths concerning individual Mahavidyas suggest their world-supporting function, and in several instances the Mahavidyas are compared to the Vaisnava *avataras, *this version of their origin only hints at world-supporting characteristics. Although some of the individual Mahavidyas are more strongly associated with magical powers than others, as we will see below, this version of the group's origin says that the group as a whole grants these powers.



### 2. THE MAHĀVIDYĀS AS FORMS OF PĀRVATĪ

The second version of the origin of the Mahavidyas was told to me by the *?nahant *\(chief priest\) of the Kashi Vishvanath temple in Varanasi, Sri Rama Shankar Tripathi, who in turn was told the story by a *tdntrika *friend of his. The *tdntrika *said the story was to be found in "all the Tantra *sdstras," *but as yet I have not been able to find it in any written source. According to this version, Siva is living with his second wife, Parvati \(whom he married after Sati killed herself\), in her father's house in the mountains. One day, Siva decides to leave. Parvatl asks him to stay, but he refuses. When he attempts to leave, she prevents him from doing so by blocking the ten doors of the house with her ten forms, the Mahavidyas. The esoteric meaning of the myth, according to the *tdntrika, *is based on an allegory. The house represents the human body, and the blocking of the ten doors means the blocking, or controlling, of the ten bodily apertures: two eyes, ears, and nostrils, plus the mouth, anus, penis or vagina, and *brahmarandhra *\(an aperture at the top of the head\). In this allegorical interpretation, Siva's desire to leave Parvati's house presumably signifies the individual's desire to indulge the senses willfully, to act without yogic discipline and control.





This version bears similarities to the first version of the Mahavidyas' origin. As in the first one, the Mahavidyas appear in order to restrain Siva, to bend him to the goddess's will. He wants to leave his father-in-law's house, but she wants him to remain. The Mahavidyas force the issue in Parvati's favor. It is also clear in this version that the Mahavidyas are all forms of one goddess, in this case, Parvatl. They represent various aspects of the goddess. As in the first version also, the appearance of the Mahavidyas is the result of marital tension. In this case, however, the goddess's father seems to play little or no role. This version of the story also emphasizes the superiority of the goddess over Siva. The fact that Siva and Parvatl are living at her father's house in itself makes this point, as it is traditional in many parts of India for the wife to leave her father's home upon marriage and become a member of her husband's lineage and live in his home among his relatives. That Siva dwells in Parvati's house implies her priority in their relationship. Her priority is also demonstrated in her ability, through the Mahavidyas, to thwart Siva's will and assert her own.

This story lends itself to an allegorical interpretation of the Mahavidyas as aspects or powers of the human organism, states of consciousness perhaps, rather than as world-supporting or cosmic powers. The teller's emphasis on their role in yogic concentration, or perhaps *sadhand *\(religious endeavor\) generally, suggests that the Mahavidyas are associated with facets, aspects, dimensions, or characteristics of the human organism, which in Tantra is understood to be the universe in microcosm. In fact, this interpretation of the Mahavidyas is supported by some tantric texts. The *Saktisamgama-tantra, *for example, says that the Mahavidyas are connected with the five senses \(sound, touch, color or sight, flavor, and smell\) and the five elements \(ether, air, fire, water, and earth\).41 Although the *Saktisamgama-tantra *does not specify which Mahavidya is connected with each sense or element, it is clear that they are associated with the fundamental makeup of humans.





The association of the Mahavidyas with *siddhis *\(magical powers\) is also implied in this second version of their creation. Such powers are acquired by means *oisadhand, *which almost always includes yogic practices aimed at controlling or enhancing the senses. We shall treat the idea of the Mahavidyas as *siddhis *in more detail below.



### 3. THE MAHĀVIDYĀS AS FORMS OF KĀLĪ

The third version of the origin of the Mahavidyas is found in a contemporary Hindi book about the worship of Tara.42 According to this version, Siva is living with the goddess Kali in the Satya Yuga, the first and most perfect of the four periods of a world cycle. Eventually he grows restless and decides he is tired of living with Kali. He gets up, and when she asks him where he is going, he answers: "Wherever I wish\!" She does not reply, and he begins to wander off. However, in whichever direction Siva goes, a form of Kali appears, one of the Mahavidyas: first Kali herself, then Tara, Sodasl, Bhuvanesvari, Bagalamukhi, Bhairavl, Kamala, Dhumavatl, Matarigl, and Chinnamasta. Seeing these goddesses, Siva loses his yearning to leave Kali and wander about, having gained the knowledge *\(vidyd\) *that she pervades the entire cosmos and that wherever one goes she is there in one of her forms.

This version of the myth is obviously related to the first two in several respects. The Mahavidyas arise as manifestations of a particular goddess, who is said to be Siva's spouse. As in the other two versions, the goddess \(Kall, in this case\) creates the Mahavidyas to prevent Siva from leaving or fleeing. This version also gives no indication that the Mahavidyas play a role similar to the Vaisnava *avataras. *Unlike the first two versions, however, there is less emphasis on marital tension, although the implication is that Siva is going against Kali's wish by trying to leave her and wander about. This version also does not indicate that the Mahavidyas are terrible or frightening \(they are not even described\) or that Siva is afraid of them. The story does not even say that the Mahavidyas prevent Siva from leaving. It simply says that Kali fills the whole cosmos with her forms.





The central point of this version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās, a point implicit in the other versions, is that it is impossible to go where the goddess is not. To depart \(or flee\) from her is impossible, as she pervades the entire cosmos in one form or another. She is everywhere; indeed, she is identical with the cosmos itself. The story as told here also places a premium on the iMahavidyas as revealing knowledge *\(vidya\), *in this case, knowledge that Kali pervades all of reality. In this sense, the story interprets the Mahāvidyās, not as *avatara-type *figures who maintain the cosmos, nor as manifestations of magical powers or states of consciousness, but as sources of wisdom. The point of this version of the story is Siva's enlightenment, which the Mahāvidyās bring about.



### 4. THE MAHĀVIDYĀS AS FORMS OF DURGĀ

Contemporary oral tradition, supported by certain iconographic evidence, supplies yet a fourth version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās. According to this version, the Mahāvidyās appear when the great battle queen Durga confronts the demons Sumbha and Nisumbha. The myth of Durga's defeat of these demons constitutes the third episode of the *Devi-mahatmya *and is also told in several *other **pnwnas.43 *Although none of the texts that describe this battle mentions the Mahāvidyās, several people have told me that they fight in it as a group. Moreover, individual Mahāvidyās are sometimes associated with the myth, and there is, as we shall see, considerable iconographic evidence to support this version of the mahāvidyās' origin. A contemporary Hindi book on Tantra also alludes to this version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās: the author states that, in the beginning, the male gods were threatened by demons and appealed to the Mahadevl, who defeated the demons by taking on different forms, including the nine Durgas44 and the ten Mahavidyas.45 The *Devi-mahatmya *is the most famous and revered of all Hindu *s'akta *texts. It was probably written around the sixth century C.e. and today occupies a central position in *s'dkta *circles. Several commentaries have been written on it, and several subsidiary texts have arisen as addenda to it.46 It is not surprising, therefore, that people associate the Mahāvidyās with this famous text. The nature of the text also invites such association, particularly the third episode featuring the defeat of Sumbha and Nisumbha. The theology of the *Devi-mahatmya *is summed up in that episode. Durga is said to underlie or pervade the cosmos; to create, maintain, and periodically destroy it according to the rhythmic sequences of Hindu cosmology \(12.33-35\); andto assume different forms from time to time when cosmic balance is threatened by enemies of the gods \(1 1.3 8-51\). The theology of the text is succinct: "Though she is eternal, the goddess becomes manifest over and over again to protect the world" \(12.32\). This is very similar to the Vaisnava *avatdra *theology.47 When associated with this type of theology, the mahāvidyās' function becomes primarily that of upholding and protecting cosmic order. We have already seen that other texts compare the Mahāvidyās to the *avatdras, *so it is not surprising that some Hindus think they appear in the *Devi-mdhdtmya, *even though they do not.





Another feature of the third episode of the *Devi-mdhdtmya *makes it understandable that the Mahāvidyās would be thought to arise there. In the course of the battle, Durga produces several goddesses to help her. She brings forth Kali while confronting the demons Canda and Munda \(7.3-22\) and calls upon her again for help in defeating Raktablja \(8.4961\). During the battle a group of seven goddesses, collectively known as the Matrkas, is created from certain male gods to help defeat the demons. They are Brahmani, created from Brahma; Mahesvari, created from Siva; Kaumari, created from Kartikeya; Vaisnavl, created from Visnu; Varahl, created from the boar *avatdra *of Visnu; Narasirhhi, created from the manlion *avatara *of Visnu; and Aindri, created from the god Indra \(8.12-20\). Later in the battle, when Durga confronts the demon Sumbha himself, he challenges her to single combat, and she agrees, saying that her battle companions are only her different forms \(10.2-5\). She then absorbs the Matrkas and Kali into herself. The *Devi-mdhdtmya *describes the nature of the Matrkas as wild and fierce. They are furious warriors and near the end of the battle dance wildly, intoxicated on the blood of their slain victims \(8.62\).48 The third episode, then, includes the creation of a group of goddesses who bear certain resemblances to the Mahāvidyās, giving rise to the tradition that the Mahāvidyās themselves appear in the *Devi**mdhdtmya. *It is also the case that other texts compare individual Mahavidyas to the Matrkas or give them Matrkas' names as epithets. The Mahavidya Tripura-bhairavl, for example, in her *sahasrandma **stotra *\(thousand-name hymn\) in the *Sdkta-pramoda, *has the following epithets: Brahmani, Mahesvari, Kaumari, Vaisnavl, Varahi, Camunda, and Indrani.49 They are the same as the names of the Matrkas in the *Devi**mdhdtmya, *except that the *Sdkta-pramoda *substitutes Camunda for Narasirhhi. The Mahavidya Bhuvaneśvarī has among her many epithets Vaisnavl, Brahmani, Narasirhhl, Mahesvari, and Varahl.50

There is also iconographic support for this fourth version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās. Contemporary religious art typically shows the Mahāvidyās surrounding a central goddess, none other than Durga \(in her form of Mahisamardini, slayer of the demon Mahisa\) and the central figure of the *Devi-mahdtmya. *While contemporary art also depicts the Mahāvidyās surrounding Siva and Sati as the central figures, the configuration with Durga in the center is just as common, if not more common, at least in the areas with which I am most familiar, Varanasi and Calcutta. The depiction of the Mahāvidyās on the *cdl **citras *of the Durga images set up for Durga Puja also reinforces the tradition that the Mahāvidyās arise to help Durga defeat demons and restore the stability of the cosmos. At the Durga Saptasati temple in Nagawa, just outside Varanasi \(a temple dedicated to the *Devi-mdbatmya, *popularly known as the *Saptasati\), *paintings of the Mahāvidyās on a wall of the inner shrine also dramatically associate the Mahāvidyās with Durga, and specifically with Durga as she appears in the *Devi-mahatmya. *From these examples it is easy to conclude that the Mahāvidyās are forms of Durga, and as Durga is primarily a battle queen, it is also logical to assume that the Mahāvidyās play the role of supporting Durga in her attempts to protect the cosmic order.51





This version, then, differs markedly from the first three in its view of the role and nature of the Mahāvidyās. This version does not mention marital tension, the goddesses do not appear in order to frighten or control Siva, they are not associated with magical powers, and they are in a battlefield rather than a domestic setting. Their association with the *avatdras *of Visnu is heightened and stressed.

Stories associated with individual Mahāvidyās also tend to suggest this fourth version of their origin. An image maker in Varanasi, for example, told me that Dhumavati was created by Durga in her battle with Sumbha and Nisumbha and that she helped defeat these demons by employing acrid smoke, "like tear gas," against them. Dhumavati, "she who abides in smoke," is here interpreted as having a special weapon with which she defeats demons for the welfare of the world. Similarly, I have been told that Bagalāmukhī has often appeared in battles, where she has deluded the enemy \(often the Pakistanis\) into making critical blunders. Swami Sadhananda Shastri, a tantric practitioner from Varanasi, whom I mentioned earlier as comparing the Mahāvidyās to the *avataras, *noted a worldmaintaining function for each of the Mahavidyas.52

Several people have also told me that famous gods and heroes of Hindu mythology employed the Mahāvidyās, or the powers gained through worshiping them, in their conquest of demons. Siva killed Taraka, Krsna defeated Karhsa, Rama killed Ravana, and Indra killed Vrtra with the help of the Mahāvidyās. Likewise, Hanuman, with the aid of the Mahāvidyās, defeated the female demon who tried to stop him from jumping to Lanka. That is, by propitiating the goddesses he was able to acquire the magical power of becoming very small and thus was able to enter the mouth of the female demon and destroy her from inside.53 Indeed, at the Sankat Mochan temple in Varanasi, a famous Hanuman temple, the Mahāvidyās are depicted around the ceiling of the porch in front of the shrine containing the main Hanuman image.





When we look at the individual Mahāvidyās in detail, as we shall do below, it also becomes apparent that they are often associated with Durga the demon slayer and the *Devi-mdhdtmya *myths. To take just one example at this point, Bhuvanesvari in her *sahasrandma **stotra *in the *Rudraydmala *has among her names several that directly identify her with Durga, the forms Durga takes in the *Devi-mdhdtmya, *and the actions she performs there. She is called She Who Destroys Madhu and Kaitabha, She Who Slays Mahisasura, and She Who Slays Sumbha and Nisumbha. These three names, that is, identify her with all three episodes of the *Devi**mdhdtmya *as the slayer of the principal demons.54 She is also called Sivadutl, Camunda, and She Who Destroys Raktabija, all of which are epithets of Durga or one of Durga's forms in the *Devi-mahdtmya. *She is also called by the name Durga itself.55



### 5. THE MAHĀVIDYĀS AS FORMS OF ŚATĀKSĪ

The fifth version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās is told in the *Devi-bhdgavata-purdna. *As in the fourth version, they arise to defend the world against demons. Once upon a time the demon Durgama gained control over the universe and forced the gods into subservience. The gods appealed to the Mahadevi for help. She appeared in a form having innumerable eyes, all of which shed tears on seeing the pitiable plight of the gods, human beings, and the earth as a result of demonic oppression. She was duly named Sataksi \(she who has one hundred eyes\). She then distributed fruits and vegetables from her own body to feed the starving beings of the earth, which was suffering from drought. For this reason she was named Sakambhari \(she who bears vegetables\). A fierce battle then began between the goddess and the demon and his armies. The goddess created several groups of goddess allies to help her in this fight, and among them were the Mahāvidyās. The text says that these goddesses are her principal *saktis *and have emerged directly from her body. It names them in the following order: Kalika, Tarinl, Tripura, Bhairavi, Kamala, Bagala, Matarigl, Tripura-sundari, Kamaksa, Tulaja-devi, Jambhini, Mohini, and Chinnamasta.56 The *Devi-bhdgavata-purdna *does not mention the Mahāvidyās again. At the end of the battle the goddess is named Durga because she killed the demon Durgama.

There are two important points to note about this version of the origin of the Mahāvidyās. First, they are created to defeat demons and defend the cosmic order, as in version 4. In this sense they function like the *avatdras *of Visnu. They are forms of the Mahadevi created for a specific purpose. Second, they are mentioned along with other groups of goddesses: the Guhya-kalis, who are said to number ten thousand, and two other groups, numbering thirty-two and sixty-four. The group of sixtyfour may allude to the sixty-four *yogims. *According to the text, the goddess \(called Mahadevi, Mahesvari, Sataksl, Sakambhari, and Durga, among other names\) has many forms and multiplies herself as needs arise. In the *Devi-bhagavata-purdna *this is a very common theme. Throughout this treatise on goddess mythology and philosophy, a central theme is the overarching reality of the Mahadevi, the highest principle in the universe, indeed, the universe itself. According to this text, she manifests herself in many female forms, and all goddesses are manifestations of her.57





### CONCLUSIONS

Having reviewed these five versions of the origin of the Mahāvidyās, we can now draw some general conclusions about what they tell us about these goddesses.

*The **Mahavidyas **are **related **to **Siva. *The goddesses from whom the Mahāvidyās are created are usually associated with Siva as his spouse. The first three versions feature Satl, Parvati, and Kali as his wife or consort. Several of the individual Mahāvidyās, as we shall see below, also have strong associations with Siva, reinforcing this point.

*Siva **is **subordinate **to **the **goddesses. *In versions 1-3, the Mahāvidyās limit, frighten, or control Siva. Indeed, this is the reason they were created in these three versions. The Mahāvidyās demonstrate the superior might of the goddess in question, her ability to overpower Siva. Versions 1-3, that is, emphasize the superiority of the goddess to Siva. A common theme in *sakta *theology, and in many tantric texts as well, is that Siva is ultimately dependent upon *sakti. *This theme is succinctly and vividly expressed in the well-known saying, "Siva is a mere *s'ava *\(corpse\) without *sakti.*" This theme of Siva's dependence upon *sakti *is perhaps expressed most clearly in version 2, which features Kali as the source of the Mahāvidyās. In this version, Siva wishes for independence. He wants to leave Kali but cannot, because she pervades the cosmos in her various forms. There is nowhere that she is not. It is impossible to exist apart from her. This theme is also implicit in versions 1 and 3.

*The **Mahavidyas **are **fierce **goddesses. *In version 1, the Mahāvidyās as a group are dreadful and frightening. Versions 2, 3, and 4 imply their fierce nature but do not make it explicit. The frightening nature of the Mahavidyas is also attested in most descriptions of individual Mahāvidyās. Kall, Tara, Bagala, Dhumavatl, and Chinnamasta are nearly always frightening, terrible, and fierce. Tripura-sundari \(Sodasi\), Bhairavl, Matarigl, and Bhuvanesvari are often said to have fearsome characteristics. Only Kamala is consistently presented as benign. In characterizing tantric religion generally as "more rugged than tender,"58 the authors of a recent book on Tantrism might well be describing the Mahāvidyās, who in fact feature prominently in tantric religion.





*The **Mahavidyas **are **associated **with **magical **powers. *Version 1 explicitly, and versions 2 and 3 implicitly, link the Mahāvidyās to magical, meditative, or yogic powers. Many other texts about the Mahāvidyās emphasize this association, particularly in the case of certain individual Mahavidyas, such as Bagalamukhi. These powers are often used to control other people, usually adversaries, and include the power to bring about whatever one wills, to attract other people to oneself, to immobilize someone or make that person mute, to cause someone to flee, to make others grow old prematurely while remaining young oneself, and to kill someone simply by willing it. The fact that in versions 1-3 a goddess is able to control Siva with the Mahāvidyās reinforces the idea that they are associated with magical or meditative powers. We might say that in these three versions, the goddess in question controls Siva with her magical or meditative powers.

*Male-female **tensions **and **female **independence. *In versions 1 and 2, the Mahāvidyās emerge against a background of male-female tensions, and there may be the implication of such tension in version 3 as well. This tension arises when the goddess feels abused, ignored, or insulted by her father or husband. In version 1, Sati becomes furious and transforms herself into such a horrible, frightening being that Siva can barely stand to look at her. The Mahāvidyās are forms of this being, further personifications of Sati's wrath. Version 1 makes clear, and versions 2 and 3 imply, that the goddess, Siva's spouse in each case, has a will of her own and is perfectly capable of exercising that will even if it means going against her husband or father. The point cannot be missed in version 1: Sati is not content to remain a passive, obedient, submissive wife if she is sufficiently provoked. She contains aspects and powers that easily overwhelm and frighten her husband.

The fact that the individual Mahāvidyās are not submissive consorts of male deities reinforces the emphasis in versions 1-3 that the goddess is an independent being. Most of the individual Mahāvidyās are not depicted with a male consort, and when they are, as in the case of Kali, Tara, and Tripura-sundari, for example, they dominate him \(both Kali and Tara are shown standing on the supine body of Siva, while Tripura-sundari is usually shown sitting on him\).





*World **maintenance. *Versions 4 and 5 differ markedly from versions 1-3 in stressing the world-maintaining function of the Mahāvidyās. Versions 4 and 5 cast the Mahāvidyās in the familiar role of forms of the goddess Durga or the Mahadevi, created by her to defeat demons who have usurped the position of the gods. The extent to which individual Mahavidyas are described or featured as world maintainers or demon slayers varies a good deal. Kali is well known as a demon slayer and is often featured in the role. Others, however, such as Dhumavati and Bagala, are only rarely described in this capacity. For the most part, with the exception of Kall, world maintenance is a minor theme in stories of the individual Mahāvidyās.

*Group **versus **individual **character **of **the **Mahavidyas. *Finally, it is important to note that the Mahāvidyās as a group in these five versions of their origin often function or are described quite differently from the individual Mahāvidyās. As was just noted, the world-maintaining aspect of the Mahāvidyās is stressed in versions 4 and 5 but figures only weakly in the worship, mythology, and symbolism of the individual Mahāvidyās. Version 1 implies that all the Mahāvidyās are associated with magical powers and that they all create conflict among people. However, the extent to which the individual Mahāvidyās are characterized this way varies a good deal. Bagalamukhi, for example, is strongly associated with these characteristics, but Kamala hardly at all.



## Interrelationships among the Mahāvidyās

As a group, the Mahāvidyās present a curious collection of goddesses. If there is an internal coherence to the group that explains how its members are related to each other, it is not readily apparent. Neither in textual sources nor in the contemporary oral tradition have I been able to discover an obvious pattern or logic to the inclusion of these ten goddesses in the same group. There are hints in some texts, and some of my informants have speculated about the question. These hints and speculations cover a wide range of possibilities.





### 1. FORMS OF THE GREAT GODDESS

Many texts and the contemporary oral tradition say that the Mahāvidyās are "all forms of the goddess," that "they are all one." Indeed, this is clearly the case. One Mahavidya is often explicitly equated with another or with several others. To take just one example, among the names of Bhuvanesvari in her *sahasranama **stotra *from the *Rudrayamala *are Matarigi \(v. 10\), Bhairavi \(v. 12\), Kalika \(v. 15\), Ugra-tara \(v. 19\), Tara \(v. 20\), Sundari \(v. 10\), Chinnamasta \(v. 60\), and Kamala \(v. 6\).59 The impression is difficult to avoid that each Mahavidya is one facet of a multifaceted Great Goddess and that each facet contains all the others—that if one observes intensely and carefully enough, one will find all forms inhering in each particular form.

What continues to be perplexing, however, is why this particular combination often goddesses has come to express the rather basic *sakta *theological theme that the Great Goddess has many forms. With the exception of Kali, Kamala, and to some extent Tripura-sundar i and Tara, the goddesses who make up this group are not very well known. Indeed, some of the Mahāvidyās are obscure. If the intention of Mahavidya mythology and iconography is to illustrate the idea that the goddess takes many forms, one would have thought that some of the more popular goddesses, such as Durga and Sarasvatl, would have been included in the group. The choice of the ten goddesses who make up the Mahāvidyās as illustrative of this idea, then, is not obvious and still begs the question concerning the essential interrelatedness of the group.



### 2. ŚAIVITE ASSOCIATIONS

Versions 1-3 of the origin of the Mahāvidyās stress that they issue from Siva's wife or consort and are all forms of this goddess. It therefore seems that one characteristic of the group that lends it coherence is that all of the Mahāvidyās are wives or consorts of Siva, or strongly associated with Siva. The problem here is that when we look at the Mahāvidyās individually, as we shall do below, we find that some of the Mahāvidyās have a stronger affiliation with Siva than others, that Dhumavati is a widow and has no consort \(although, as we shall see, one of her individual origin myths relates her to Satl\), and that Kamala is the wife of Vishnu, not Siva. Moreover, an explanation of the interrelationship of the Mahāvidyās as centered in their relationship to Siva breaks down outside these three versions. The emphasis on the independence of the goddess from whom the Mahāvidyās arise, and on the independence of several individual Mahāvidyās, also tends to attenuate this feature as the key to explaining the logic of their interrelationship.





### 3. SISTERS

In answer to my question concerning how the Mahāvidyās relate to each other, a priest at the Dhumavatl temple in Varanasi suggested that they are all sisters. Other groups of goddess sisters exist in Hinduism. The seven goddesses who form a protective circle in the desert around the city of Jaiselmer in western Rajasthan, for example, are said to be sisters. The priest at the Dhumavati temple said that Laksmi \(Kamala\) is the older sister of Dhumavatl and that Sodasl \(Sundari\) is younger than the others. He was uncertain about the relative ages of the other Mahāvidyās. This idea is not found in textual sources and seems unknown to most of my contemporary informants. It therefore seems less than satisfying as the key to understanding the interrelationship of the Mahāvidyās.



### 4. STAGES IN WOMEN'S LIVES

A related idea is that the Mahāvidyās represent different stages or aspects of a woman's life cycle. In ancient Greek religion, the divine feminine was said to reveal herself in three main forms, corresponding to the "three ages of woman": maiden, mother, and crone. I have also learned that the Nine Durgas, a group of goddesses in Varanasi who are said to be different forms of Durga,60 are considered by a female devotee of Durga to represent the differing stages of the goddess's \(and by extension a woman's\) life cycle.61 This scheme has some plausibility vis-a-vis certain goddesses in the Mahavidya group. Dhumavatl, for example, might represent the goddess in old age. She is usually shown as aged and is nearly always described as a widow. Other members of the group, particularly Sodasl \(Sundari\), are said to be sixteen years old. Other Mahāvidyās, such as Bhairavl in her form as Annapurna-bhairavl, have matronly qualities.

One problem is that other members of the group do not seem to fit this scheme. Moreover, there is little or no emphasis on the motherhood of the Mahāvidyās. Although they are sometimes called Ma, they are not shown with infants or children, and their independence from male consorts is stressed. The married and motherly aspects of the female life cycle are minimized in the mythology of the Mahāvidyās. This scheme also, then, seems unsatisfactory as the key to understanding the interrelationships of the group.





### 5. STAGES OF CREATION AND DESTRUCTION

One of the most common *sakta *theological formulas for presenting or describing the multiform nature of the Mahadevi is to think of her as functioning in three ways, corresponding to the functions of the male *trimmti *\(the great male deities, "having three forms": Brahma, the creator; Visnu, the maintainer; Siva, the destroyer\). That is, in her creative aspect the Great Goddess manifests herself as MahasarasvarJ \(corresponding to Brahma\), in her role as maintainer of the cosmos, as Mahalaksmi \(corresponding to Visnu\), and as destroyer of the cosmos, as Mahakali \(corresponding to Siva\). It has been suggested to me that the Mahāvidyās might be divided along these lines, that they represent symbols of the cosmic process of creation, preservation, and destruction, which the goddess oversees or embodies. Indeed, a contemporary practical guide to Tantra for aspirants says: "Mahamaya becomes Sodasl and creates the world, then she becomes Bhuvanesvari and maintains the world, and then she becomes Chinnamasta to destroy the world."62

Another author supports this idea. He sees seven stages of creation and three stages of dissolution of the universe symbolically expressed in the Mahāvidyās as given in their usual order: Kali represents the primordial void prior to creation, Tara represents the first manifestations of creation, Tripura-sundari represents the creation of time, and so on.63 The problem with this particular attempt is that the last mentioned of the Mahāvidyās, Kamala, is thereby associated with destruction, exactly the opposite of her character: she is traditionally associated with abundance and fertility. The other Mahāvidyās also do not fit at all neatly into this scheme, so it seems highly unlikely that the usual sequence in which they are named is meant to suggest seven stages of creation and three of dissolution.

It is possible to categorize some individual Mahāvidyās under the three functions of creation, maintenance, and destruction. That is, some of them are associated with preservation, such as Laksmi; others with destruction, such as Kali and Tara; others with creation, such as Bhuvanesvari and Sodasi. Few of the individual Mahāvidyās, however, are primarily images of cosmogonic functions. Kali and Kamala are members of the well-known *sakta **trimurti, *the tripartite cosmogonic formula that says that Mahasarasvati creates the world, Mahalaksmi maintains it, and Mahakali destroys it, but the other members of the group do not neatly fit the formula. Some of the individual Mahāvidyās have little or no apparent connection with any cosmogonic function. Therefore, this approach to the interrelationship of the Mahāvidyās also seems unsatisfying.





On the other hand, some individual Mahāvidyās are associated with all three goddesses \(Mahasarasvati, Mahalaksmi, and Mahakali\) and all three of their cosmic functions. So, for example, in the *sahasrandma **sto**tra *of Bhuvanesvari from the *Rudraydmala, *Bhuvanesvari is called Sarasvati \(v. 16\), She Who Creates and Sustains the World \(v. 52\), Kamala \(v. 6\), Mahalaksmi \(v. 65\), and Kalika \(v. 18\).64 In fact, the tendency is usually to associate a particular Mahavidya with a wide range of characteristics and functions and to equate her with all three cosmic functions, not just one.



### 6. THE THREE *GUNAS *

A related approach to explaining the interconnections among, or the underlying logic of, the Mahāvidyās is to think of them as symbols of the three *gunas *\(qualities\). In this approach, each Mahavidya corresponds to one of the three constituents of the created universe: *sattva *\(purity\), *rajas *\(energy\), or *tamas *\(ignorance\). Indeed, the three goddesses of the *sakta **trimurti *discussed above are also sometimes associated with the three *gunas: *Mahasarasvati with *sattva, *Mahalaksmi with *rajas, *and Mahakali with *tamas. *The three *gunas *are often related to colors: *sattva *is white, *rajas *is red, and *tamas *is black. In the case of the Mahāvidyās, John Woodroffe says that according to the *Kamadhenu-tantra *Tara is identified with *sattva **guna *and the achieving of *kaivalya, *yogic bliss; Sodasi, Bhuvanesvari, and Chinnamasta are associated with *rajas **guna; *and Dhumavatl, Kamala, Bagala, and Matarigl are related to *tamas**guna,*,65 The *Mahanirvdna-tantra *associates the individual Mahāvidyās with the three *gunas *in the same way.66 It has also been suggested to me that the complexions of the Mahāvidyās, which vary in color, might be the key to identifying them with the three *gunas. *So, for example, Kali, Tara, and Matarigl, who have black or dark complexions, would be associated with the *tamas **guna, *while Bhairavi, who has a red complexion, would be associated with the *rajas **guna. *Mahāvidyās with golden or light complexions, such as Bagala, Dhumavati, and Chinnamasta, would be related to *sattva **guna. *

This of course divides the Mahāvidyās quite differently from Woodroffe's scheme based on the *Knmadhenu-tantra. *Another problem that arises here concerns the compatibility of the color of an individual Mahavidya's complexion with what we know of her nature and functions. Kali, who would be linked with *tamas, *is known in many texts as the symbol of the highest knowledge, while the *tamas **guna *is equated with delusion, lust, and sloth. Bagalamukhi, who is usually said to have a golden or light complexion, is often associated with the acquisition of magical powers with which one can satisfy worldly desires, but the *sattva **guna, *with which she would be identified in terms of her color, is related to purely spiritual qualities. So this formula also cannot easily be applied to the Mahāvidyās to explain their coherence as a group.





### 7. THREE MOODS

Yet another tripartite scheme used to describe the nature of the goddess and her many manifestations is found in the *Kdlikd-purdna, *where it is said that the Mahadevi has three forms or moods: amorous, angry, and benevolent. She assumes these forms, the text says, according to her whims. In her amorous form she holds a yellow garland and stands on a red lotus on a white corpse. In her angry form she holds a sword and stands directly on a corpse. In her benevolent mood she rides a lion.67 The *Kdlikd-purdna *also says that the goddess Tripura is adored in three aspects: Tripura-bala \(the virgin\), Tripura-sundari \(the beautiful\), and Tripura-bhairavi \(the terrible\).68

This schema applies fairly well to certain Mahāvidyās, such as Dhumavatl and Kali, who are primarily terrible manifestations. But when we look at each of the Mahāvidyās in detail, it becomes obvious that they usually have all three of these characteristics. In many cases, it is difficult to determine which of the three "moods" a Mahavidya best expresses. While the schema is certainly suggestive, I do not find in it the key to explaining the inner coherence of the ten goddesses who form the .VLihavidyas.



### 8. FIERCE AND PEACEFUL FORMS

Another common way of schematizing the various forms of the Mahadevi in *sdkta *theology is to say that she reveals or expresses herself in fierce *\(raudra\) *and peaceful *\(saumya\) *forms.69 Similarly, informants have suggested to me that the Mahāvidyās may be divided into fierce and peaceful manifestations of the Mahadevi. According to this scheme, Kali, Tara, Bagala, Chinnamasta, and Dhumavati might be included under the *raudra *forms of the Mahadevl, while Sodasl, Bhuvanesvari, Kamala, Matarigi, and Bhairavi might be included under the *saumya *forms.





Apart from the fact that I have not found any texts that apply this schema to the Mahāvidyās, certain Mahāvidyās are difficult to classify as either fierce or peaceful. Sometimes an individual Mahavidya has several different forms, some more fierce than others. Others seem ambiguous vis-a-vis such a dichotomy; for example, Dhumavati is described as quarrelsome and has inauspicious characteristics, but she is not actually said to be fearsome or terrible. Bhairavi also presents somewhat of a problem, for although her name means "the frightful one," her descriptions often depict her as peaceful. Also, if the primary purpose of selecting ten goddesses to illustrate this dichotomy were the rationale for the Mahāvidyās, it is strange that certain goddesses who are unambiguous examples of either the *raudra *type, such as Camunda, or of the *saumya *type, such as Sarasvati, are omitted from the group. It is true that the Mahāvidyās include examples of both the *raudra *and *saumya *types, but as a structure to explain all ten of the goddesses the polarity remains unsatisfying.



### 9. DYNAMIC AND STATIC ASPECTS OF THE DIVINE

Another way of classifying goddesses is to think of them as expressing either the dynamic or static nature of reality. A tantric scholar in Varanasi suggested to me that the goddesses among the Mahāvidyās who sit or stand on or otherwise dominate a male figure \(these would include Kali, Tara, Bagala, Bhairavl, Tripura-sundari, and sometimes Chinnamasta\) might illustrate the dynamic aspect of the goddess, while the others \(Dhumavati, Matarigi, Kamala, and Bhuvanesvari\) illustrate the static aspect. Again, while this schema might be helpful in suggesting how certain *sakta *theological themes are reflected in the Mahāvidyās, it applies more clearly to certain Mahāvidyās than others and seems forced in cases where the particular goddess illustrates neither pole in any clear way.



### 10. KNOWLEDGE AND IGNORANCE \(CONCEALMENT\)

Another way of classifying manifestations of the goddess according to two polarities is to say that her forms are *vidya *or *avidyd, * that is, some of her manifestations are meant to get rid of ignorance and delusion and grant liberating knowledge \(the *vidya *forms\), while other forms are meant to veil reality and delude beings as to its true nature \(the *avidya *forms\).70 According to this scheme, Kali might belong to the former type of manifestation, symbolizing the nature of ultimate truth, while Kamala, who is approached primarily for worldly rewards, might belong to the latter. The other Mahāvidyās might be arranged in similar fashion. The problem here is that a goddess such as Kali, about whom so much is written, and who has such an ancient and widespread cult, clearly plays both roles. To assign a particular Mahavidya to one pole or the other is difficult in many cases. Which type of goddess, *vidya *or *avidya, *for example, is Dhumavati or Matarigl? A case might be made for either pole. Likewise with most of the Mahāvidyās. Also, I have yet to find any text that divides the Mahāvidyās in this fashion.





### 11. THE LUNAR PHASES

A tantric scholar suggested to me yet another approach to explaining the interrelationships of the Mahāvidyās, one that identifies them with the different lunar *tithis *\(the thirty days of the waxing and waning moon\). According to this scholar, Kali is identified with the new moon *\(amavasya\) *and Sodasl with the full moon *ipurnima\). *These two goddesses represent completeness of knowledge, according to this scheme, in two different ways, both equally valid. Kali represents complete knowledge in terms of transcendence. Like the new moon, she is beyond what can be perceived and circumscribed. Or perhaps one could say that Kali represents knowledge gained by getting rid of all false knowledge, by shedding ignorance, while Sodasi represents knowledge gained by acquiring increasing amounts of knowledge until one is filled with wisdom. The former would be suggested in the *tithis *of the waning phase of the moon, while the latter \(Sodasi\) would be suggested in the *tithis *of the waxing moon. Sodasi, whose name means "the sixteenth," represents complete knowledge or wisdom in terms of being all-inclusive. As the sixteenth, she includes all the other fifteen *tithis. *The other Mahāvidyās are associated with the waxing and waning lunar *tithis *according to which of the poles they most resemble. The tantric scholar suggested that Chinnamasta, who is close in nature or meaning to Kall, would represent the first and second waning lunar *tithis, *while Bhuvanesvari and Kamala, both of whom are associated with abundance, would represent the last four *tithis *prior to the full moon.





Again, although this approach may be helpful in the case of a few of the Mahāvidyās, it seems forced in most. The extent to which a particular Mahavidya approximates knowledge as transcendent or knowledge as all-inclusive is usually difficult to determine.



### 12. LEFT- AND RIGHT-HANDED GODDESSES

Some informants have suggested to me that the Mahavidyas are interconnected through their association with the right- or lefthanded paths in Tantrism. Tantrism describes two paths, left and right, as means to achieving spiritual fulfillment. The left-handed path is restricted to those of heroic nature, is described as dangerous, and employs the infamous *paiica **tattva *ritual in which the aspirant partakes of five forbidden things: meat, fish, wine, a particular type of grain \(possibly a drug of some kind\), and illicit sexual intercourse. Tantric texts sometimes specify which path should be used in worshiping particular Mahāvidyās. The *Saktisamgama-tantra, *for example, says that Kali, Tara, Sundari, Bhairavl, Chinnamasta, Matarigl, and Bagala are fond of the left-handed path, while Bhuvanesvarl, Dhumavati, and Kamala should be worshiped by the right-handed path.711 Iowever, in many cases texts specify that both paths are appropriate, and in practice most of the goddesses who belong to the Mahāvidyās are worshiped by practitioners of both paths. It is difficult, therefore, to designate particular Mahāvidyās as belonging either to the left- or the right-handed paths.

If one is attempting to divide the Mahāvidyās between right and left, it is relevant to consider images in which they are arrayed in the ten directions, with a goddess or Siva in the center. One might expect that the goddesses on the central deity's left side are those worshiped primarily by means of the left-handed path and those on the right, by the righthanded path, but that is not the case. According to the *Mahabhagavata**pwmia, *Tara, Sodas, and Tripura-sundari are located to the left \(the east\), while Bhairavl, Chinnamasta, and Bhuvanesvari are to the right. These six goddesses do not correspond in any consistent way to the left- and right-handed paths.



### 13. STAGES OF CONSCIOUSNESS

Finally, the Mahāvidyās might be understood as symbols of the stages \(or types\) of consciousness experienced by tantric aspirants in their progressive spiritual development. Each goddess confers a certain type of perfection, blessing, or awareness. These perfections *\(siddhis\) *or types of consciousness, meditative states, or moods *\(bhavas\)12 *might be understood as progressive, some presupposing or being more inclusive than others. Several informants independently of each other suggested this approach to the Mahāvidyās, and it has some textual support.73 In this approach, Kali is understood to represent unfettered, complete knowledge of self and of ultimate reality, fully enlightened consciousness that has transcended all limitations of egocentricity.74 She is symbolic of the ultimate goal of tantric *sadhand *\(spiritual exercise\). Tara, who is very similar to Kali in appearance, symbolizes a high or expanded state of awareness, but a state that has not entirely transcended physical and personal limitations. Bagalamukhi represents a state of sharply focused consciousness, an intensified will that is capable of directly influencing people with whom the adept comes in contact. Kamala and Bhairavi symbolize lower states of consciousness, in which the adept is preoccupied with satisfying bodily and mental needs. The other Mahāvidyās symbolize states of consciousness that arise between the adept's preoccupation with worldly, bodily, or personal needs and desires and the eventual dawning of the fully enlightened consciousness represented by Kali.





In tantric religion, the progressive nature of *sadhand *is often described as the awakening, arising, and ascent of *kundalini **sakti. *This female power or energy is depicted as a coiled and slumbering serpent at the base of the spine in a *cakra *\(center\), pictured as a lotus. Through meditative techniques, the aspirant awakens this power and causes it to ascend by way of the central channel, the *susumnd **nadi, *which traverses the body along the line of the backbone. As the *kundalini *rises, it passes through six other *cakras, *also represented as lotuses, and awakens or invigorates them as it reaches them. Different *bhavas, *"spiritual moods" or states of consciousness, are sometimes associated with the awakening of each *cakra. *According to one adept, when *kundalini **sakti *awakens in the *muladhdra **cakra, *one experiences a feeling of dissatisfaction with ordinary life. That is, *kundalini**sadhana *represents a desire to go beyond or to expand normal consciousness.75 Ultimately, the *sadhaka *\(aspirant\) seeks to have the *kundalini *rise to the topmost *cakra *at the crown of the head, where she unites with Siva and creates the bliss of awakening *\(mahasukha\). *

In interpreting the iMahavidyas as states of consciousness, meditative states, or mental perfections *\(siddhis\), *one might think of them as symbols of the nature of the mental states associated with the seven *cakras *of *kundalini*yoga.76 There is, in fact, evidence that the Mahāvidyās are associated with the *cakras, *and with the *kundalini *generally. It is said of Bhuvanesvari, for example, that she sleeps in the *muladhdra **cakra, *the lowest *cakra, *where the *kundalhn *sleeps.77 It is also said that Bhuvanesvari cuts the knots of \(or awakens\) the *cakras *and rises to meet Siva, which means that she is equated with the *kundalini.78 *Another example is Tripurabhairavl, who is called Sat-cakra-krama-vasinl \(she who abides in the six *cakras\).79 *





Lending credibility to this approach to the Mahāvidyās is the *tantras'' *ranking of different paths. Many *tantras *name seven \(sometimes nine\) different paths and describe and rank them, usually from inferior \(in which the aims are worldly\) to superior \(in which the aims are transcendent\). A standard list of the seven paths, in ascending order, is: Vedacara, Vaisnavacara, Saivacara, Daksinacara, Vamacara, Siddhantacara, and Kaulacara. The *Saktisamgama-tantra *says that the highest path, the Kaulacara, comprises the *kula, *the family of worshipers, who know the truth that reality is comprised *ois'akti *and Siva.80 The *Mahdnirvdna-tantra *says that the Kaulacara path includes the performance of the *panca **makdra *\(five essentials\) ritual and is only entered upon after the aspirant has been initiated by a guru.81

A good example of goddesses representing progressive states of perfection is found in the Srividya cult. In ritually and meditatively moving from the outward parts of the Srividya *cakra, *which represents the entire cosmos, to the center, the adept acquires different *siddhis, *or perfections. The outer *siddhis *are less powerful and more worldly in nature, while the inner *siddhis *are both more spiritual and more powerful. These *siddhis, *furthermore, are personified as goddesses.82

There is even a tradition that associates particular goddesses with each of the seven *cakras. *Dakinl is associated with the *muladhdra **cakra, *Rakinl with the *svddhisthdna **cakra, *Laksml with the *manipura **cakra, *Kakinl with the *anahata **cakra, *Sakini with the *visuddha **cakra, *Hakim with the *djnd **cakra, *and Nirvana-sakti with the *sahasrdra **cakra.83 *For the most part, these goddesses are hardly known outside this context, and of the seven, only Laksml, whom we may identify with Kamala, is a Mahavidya.

What is missing in order to make the association of the Mahāvidyās with the *cakras *and ascending states of consciousness a convincing interpretation of the interrelationship of the Mahāvidyās is a clear tradition that asserts a hierarchy or progressive ranking of the ten goddesses84 and consistently identifies each one with specific paths, *siddhis, *or *cakras. *Although a certain Mahavidya may sometimes be identified with a particular path, *siddhi, *or *cakra, *there is seldom a consistent pattern, except, perhaps, in the case of Kali, who is often identified with the Kaulacara path, which is considered the highest. Although we find Mahāvidyās associated with *kundalini **sakti, *the *miiladhara **cakra, *or the *cakras *generally, it is rare to find Mahāvidyās assigned to each of the other *cakras *in a predictable way. It is also curious that there are ten, not seven, Mahāvidyās if they are meant to be symbols of the progressive stages of consciousness experienced by aspirants in *kundalini **yoga. *Although I am inclined to see in this approach a helpful framework for thinking about the meaning of the Mahāvidyās as a group and as individual goddesses, the evidence is too thin to say with assurance that this is the key to understanding how they relate to each other within the group.





We seem left, then, with no entirely satisfactory key to understanding the connections among the Mahāvidyās. Perhaps the best we can hope for is to combine all the possibilities we have mentioned, or some subset of them, in our efforts to discern the coherence of the group, to understand how such a curious mix of goddesses has come together to form the ten Mahāvidyās.



## Worship of the Mahāvidyās

The Mahāvidyās are approached in a variety of ritual contexts, and the worship of one Mahavidya may differ from that of others. Some of the Mahāvidyās, for example, have ancient and widespread cults that existed, and still exist, quite apart from the Mahāvidyās as a group. This is the case with Kali, Tara, Tripura-sundari, and Kamala, for example. In general, though, we can think of their worship as taking place primarily in two contexts: in temples, where they are served by priests and where people come to take part in public worship, and in temporary places marked off by individual aspirants, where worship is undertaken in tantric fashion, either right-handed or left-handed. Although temple and tantric styles of worship have some similarities, they are quite different in mood and style.



### TEMPLE WORSHIP

The extent to which individual Mahāvidyās are worshiped in temples varies considerably. There are Kali and Laksmi temples throughout India, and these two goddesses have been widely worshiped in such settings since ancient times. Other members of the Mahāvidyās, such as Dhumavati, Bagala, and Chinnamasta, however, are not well known at all outside the group, and there are very few temples dedicated specially to them anywhere in India. As for temples dedicated to the Mahāvidyās as a group, I know of only the one mentioned above in Calcutta, although the Mahāvidyās are depicted as a group in many goddess temples across North India.





A worshiper in a temple approaches a Mahavidya primarily as a devoted servant attending a royal mistress. The whole structure of Hindu temple *piija *is patterned on the model of a subject serving a royal person. The proper mood of the devotee is that of humble supplication before a superior being from whom one makes requests and to whom one offers respectful service and homage. The standard sixteen-part *piija, *which is performed daily, often several times daily in large temples, consists of actions that are thought appropriate for a servant or subject toward a superior, royal figure. The devotee who comes to the temple— the royal court—also brings offerings appropriate to the particular deity. Several of the Mahāvidyās like blood offerings \(which are made in the form of animal sacrifices\), in addition to the typical flowers, incense, and fruit. Kall, Chinnamasta, Tara, and Bagalamukhi all have a reputation for being pleased by blood offerings, although practices vary from temple to temple.

Worship of the Mahāvidyās in temples invites an open, public approach to them as powers who are able to grant devotees blessings and favors and who are pleased with devotional service and the public festivals and celebrations that are a part of every temple's annual cycle. In the context of temple worship, the individual Mahāvidyās are perceived as very similar to other Hindu deities. They are thought of as great beings who have an objective existence outside the devotee and who live in heavenly places or special, sacred dwellings constructed for them on earth. In this context, the ritual actions of the devotee are directed outward toward the powerful being, who is affirmed to exist outside, above, or beyond the worshiper.



### TANTRIC WORSHIP

The majority of texts that mention the Mahāvidyās are tantric. Indeed, it is probably fair to refer to the Mahāvidyās as primarily tantric goddesses, by which I mean that the proper framework in which to understand them is tantric. It is clear that they are typically approached by means of tantric rituals and that their worship is to be interpreted according to tantric principles. Although many tantric texts give the specific details for sixteen-part *pujd *\(discussed above\), such *pujd *takes on a somewhat different meaning in a tantric context, as we shall see.





In tantric worship, which is generally referred to as *sadhana, *or spiritual exercise, the aspirant seeks to achieve an awakened or enlightened state of consciousness through techniques that are physical, mental, ritualistic, and spiritual at the same time. A central theme in tantric *sadhana *is the identification of the macrocosm with the microcosm, which is represented by the human organism, specifically by the *sadhaka, *the practitioner or adept. Through meditation techniques, rituals, images, mantras, yantras, and *mandalas *\(schematic diagrams\), the adept systematically identifies parts, aspects, or dimensions of himself or herself with parts, aspects, or dimensions of the cosmos. The deities are thought of as aspects of the cosmos that correspond to aspects of the human organism— mental, physical, or both. The aim of tantric *sadhana *is to establish identity with the deity worshiped, to appropriate that deity, or to awaken that deity within oneself, and then to offer *it **pujd, *which in effect means worshiping the divinity within oneself. Or, conversely, one worships the deity residing within in the hope of awakening in oneself the reality that it represents.

The self-divinization of tantric *sddhana *may have several results. The adept may acquire an expanded self-awareness, that is, the wisdom of selfknowledge, which is often said to be tantamount to achieving *moksa **\(mukti *or "liberation"\). That is, tantric *sadhana *may result in redemptive transformation. Or such *sadhana *may lead to heightened sense perception, the acquisition *oisiddhis *through which the adept excels at one of the senses or even transcends the limitations of sensory perception. These *siddhis, *in turn, may lead to enjoyments impossible before achieving such perfections. Or tantric *sadhana *may result in an intensified or expanded mental capacity or power that enables the practitioner to achieve feats of selfcontrol or control over others. We have already seen, and will see in more detail below when we discuss the Mahāvidyās individually, that all of these results, or "fruits"—redemptive wisdom, increased sensory perception, worldly boons, and magical powers—are associated with worship of the Mahāvidyās.

We can get a good idea of how the Mahāvidyās are worshiped according to tantric principles and rites from a brief description *oisamanya **pujd, *ordinary or regular worship of the goddess, as described in the *Kdlikd-purdna, *a fourteenth-century text devoted to the goddess in the form of Kali.85 Though the text does not describe tantric worship of the Mahāvidyās per se, it provides a rather detailed outline of the stages of tantric worship, which can be adapted to any given deity. The ritual may be done almost anywhere, although the text does recommend certain sites, such as a mountaintop or a cave, and says that the ritual is more potent if done at a place sacred to whichever form of the goddess is being worshiped. The ritual may be performed at any time and does not require a priest. It is done by an individual by and for himself \(let us imagine that the adept is a male in the following description, although the adept could be female\). A physical image of the goddess is not necessary. The ritual probably takes no longer than an hour and could be done in abbreviated form in considerably less time. The *Kalika-purana *describes a continuous set of actions, but we can think of the ceremony as having four parts: \(1\) preparation, \(2\) meditation, \(3\) worship of the goddess herself, and \(4\) concluding rites.





The opening rites of *samanya **pujd *aim primarily at purification of the adept and the delimitation of an appropriate place within which to perform the ceremony.86 The adept bathes, sips water \(signifying internal purification\), and asks the goddess to rid his mind of any impurities. He also recites certain mantras at this point to expel potentially harmful spirits.

The adept next purifies the place of worship by sprinkling water on the ground. He carefully inspects the items to be used in the ritual to insure that they are unblemished. Flowers to be offered, for example, should be free from insects. Items are also purified by means of mantras and water. The adept then draws a yantra \(a schematic diagram\) representing the particular goddess to be worshiped. In the case of the Mahāvidyās, each has her distinctive yantra or *mandala. *

In the second phase of the ceremony, the adept performs a series of acts that are primarily mental to further purify himself. In general, this part of the rite aims at the adept's symbolic death and dissolution. The text says that the body is composed of impure elements—mucus, feces, urine, and so on—and as such is unfit to be an instrument of worship. The adept's symbolic death is followed by his mental re-creation of the world and, most important, by the appearance of the goddess herself.

Assuming the correct posture and practicing breath control, the adept begins a ritual that releases his life force, his jiva,, from his body. He imagines *his **jiva *passing through different stages, each connected with an element: earth, water, fire, air, and sound. Finally, identifying himself with space, he imagines his life force leaving his body through the top of his head. This signals his symbolic death.





The adept then symbolically dissolves his body, which as a microcosm of the universe also represents the physical world as a whole. He imagines his body dissolving, then imagines it burning on a funeral pyre, then imagines the ashes blowing away, and finally imagines a shower of pure nectar cleaning the place where his body had lain and been burned. In effect, the adept has destroyed the cosmos and himself by reducing them to their elemental constituents. His ultimate purification is now complete, and he is ready to be reborn.

Re-creation of the cosmos, and the rebirth of the adept, begins with the adept pronouncing the seed syllable *\(bija\) *of the goddess. He then visualizes the different parts of the cosmos, often in the form of letters, syllables, or mantras. He completes the re-creation of the cosmos by visualizing the goddess herself seated on a throne in the center of the world, which is imagined as her particular *mandate. *Next he identifies himself with the goddess by placing a flower that he has been holding in his hands on top of his head and saying: "I am this." The adept reinforces his deification with *mudras *\(hand gestures\) and mantras that identify parts of the cosmos with parts of his body. Having provided himself with a new, divine body \(actually identified with the goddess herself\), he is now prepared to undertake worship of the goddess herself.

This begins with inward worship. That is, the adept imagines the goddess and her attendants dwelling in his heart. He pictures the goddess by reciting her *dhyana *mantra, which often describes her in great detail. He then transfers the goddess from his heart into the yantra he has drawn on the ground by exhaling through his right nostril onto a flower that he holds in his hand. Her transference to the yantra can also be done with *mudras, *hand gestures with which the adept "catches" the goddess and places her in the yantra. The adept now praises the goddess with hymns and treats her as an honored guest by offering her various articles, physically or mentally. The actions are similar to temple *pujd, *but in contrast to elaborate and costly temple *pujd, *in this ceremony the adept offers the goddess little more than purified water and flowers. The text instructs the adept, throughout this part of the ceremony, to constantly repeat the goddess's special mantra, which is said to be identical with the goddess herself.

Outward worship of the goddess in the *mandala, *who can be any of the ten Mahāvidyās, closes with a final offering, usually consisting of rice or some other grain. The adept may also make a blood offering. An entire chapter in the *Kdlikd-purdna *suggests offerings appropriate to the goddess and the rewards that may be expected from them. Among the Mahāvidyās, Kali, Tara, and Chinnamasta are fond of blood offerings, so these are recommended in their worship, while Mahāvidyās like Kamala do not receive such offerings.





The adept now dismisses the goddess by circumambulating the flower that represents her and mentally visualizing her return to her normal abode: heaven, the adept's heart, or some particular holy place. If the goddess is visualized as returning to the worshiper's heart, the adept smells the flower that represents her, inhaling her, as it were, and then places the flower on his head. With the worship of the goddess complete, he finishes the ceremony by erasing the yantra or *mandala *and disposing of the remains of the offerings. The remains are considered especially potent and dangerous and must be handled with great care. Fierce goddesses are associated with these leftovers and must be propitiated before the ceremony is complete.87

*Samanya **puja *is a ritual through which the worshiper is deified. After ritually undertaking one's own death and dissolution, one re-creates the world and oneself. In this act of re-creation, the goddess is identified with the worshiper. The two are declared essentially one. In this sense, *samanya **puja *is worship of one's own inner sacred essence as well as of a superior divine being. Or perhaps one could say that in *samanya **puja, *which is essentially tantric in nature, one reveres one's highest or most essential nature, which is identified with the goddess.

During *samanya **piijd, *then, which is the likely setting for worship of the Mahāvidyās, the emphasis is upon individual meditation and identification with the goddess in question. Unlike temple worship, the goal is to inwardly realize the presence of the goddess in the aspirant. Although *samanya **puja *perceives the goddess in question to be both a superior being who exists outside the *sddhaka *and an inward dimension or aspect of the worshiper, the emphasis, particularly in comparison to temple worship, is on the latter.

The Mahāvidyās are also worshiped in a format known as the lefthanded \(Vamacara\) path in Tantrism. This type of worship is characterized primarily by *xhepadca **tattva *or *pan**ca **makdra *ritual, the ritual of the "five forbidden things." According to the *tantras, *it is reserved for the few of heroic nature who are capable of undertaking it without harming themselves in the process. The *sadhaka *must partake of five things that are ordinarily forbidden or are highly polluting: meat, fish, wine, *mudrd *\(a type of grain that may have hallucinogenic properties\), and sexual intercourse with a woman who is not one's wife \(the ritual is described from a male point of view\). The ritual is done under the guidance of a guru.





Individual texts differ over whether this rite is to be done alone or in a group. Texts devoted to the Mahāvidyās often refer to the *panca **tattva *ritual, indicating that at least some of the goddesses are worshiped in this context.

The logic or intention of this ritual appears to be related to perceiving or intensely realizing the basic truth that all of reality, all things, are pervaded by *sakti, *the goddess herself, or *brahman. *By partaking of forbidden things, one affirms that ultimately there is nothing that is not the goddess, that nothing is polluting, for she pervades all.88 Such distinctions as "pure" and "polluting" impose artificial qualifications on the manifestation of the goddess as the physical world. The *panca **tattva *ritual seeks to abolish a mentality that perceives the world according to artificial human constructs, that perceives the essentially unified world that is the goddess \(or *brahman, *with which the goddess is often identified\) as fractured and divided.

The precise connection between the Mahāvidyās and the left-handed path, and the *panca **tattva *ritual specifically, is not entirely clear. Their worship may include this ritual, but some may be worshiped by either the right- or left-handed paths. Perhaps the fierce or inauspicious qualities of some of the Mahāvidyās that are worshiped according to the lefthanded path relate to the logic of *thepafica **tattva *ritual, in which the adept is forced to confront and partake of forbidden things. Some of the Mahāvidyās, particularly Kali, Tara, Dhumavati, and Chinnamasta, are identified with such harsh realities as death, destruction, old age, and decrepitude. By confronting these deities, and one's fears, one gains release from the inhibitions and constraints they can generate.



## The Mahāvidyās and Magical Powers

We have already touched on the association of the Mahavidyas with magical powers, but it is so persistent that we should discuss it in more detail before turning to a treatment of the individual goddesses. Hindu literature is full of stories in which individuals, often demons, undertake ascetic and meditative practices in order to acquire special abilities with which they hope to achieve power, wealth, sex, or some other worldly pleasure or reward. In these stories, it is clear that they employ meditative and ascetic practices to attain selfish, worldly goals rather than what we might think of as spiritual ones. Texts on yoga say that one can acquire special powers *\(siddhis\) *by practicing yoga, but warn against indulging in them and thereby perverting the spiritual quest.89





Other Hindu texts deal specifically with magical powers. The *Ddmara**tantra, *for example, is devoted entirely to describing the use of mantras to acquire *siddhis, *particularly healing ones, but also the kinds often associated with the Mahāvidyās, such as causing strife, paralyzing or obtaining victory over an enemy, and attracting a person of the opposite sex.90 The *Phetkdrini-tantra *describes six magical powers *\(sat **karmdni\): **sdnti *\(pacification\), *vaslkarana *\(subjugation\), *sta?nbhana *\(immobilization or paralyzing\), *uccdtana *\(eradication\), *vidvesana *\(sowing dissension\), and *mdrana *\(causing death\).91 This text, which is named after Kali as "the howling one" \(Phetkarini\), has chapters on several of the Mahāvidyās, thereby associating the quest for magical powers with the Mahāvidyās specifically. The six magical acts are also described in the *Salya-tantra, *the *Dattdtreya**tantra,92 *and the *Udddmara-tantra.93, *The *Kalarudra-t**antra *"describes destructive rites to be executed with the help of *mantras *of fearsome goddesses such as Dhumavati."94 The *Satkarmadlpikd *and the *Kdmaratna *are also preoccupied with magical acts.95 The *Sdradd-tilaka-tantra *\(23.122\!?.\) mentions a list of six magical practices: *sdnti *\(cure of disease and the expulsion of evil spirits\), *vasya *\(bringing others under one's control\), *stam**bhana *\(paralyzing the activity of others\), *vidvesa *\(causing dissension\), *uccdtana *\(compelling someone to leave home\), and *mdrana *\(killing by will\).96 The *Brhaddharma-purdna *says that the Mahāvidyās as a group give the powers of eradication, attracting, paralyzing, killing by wishing it, making a person sick, controlling speech, causing a person to get old, and preserving one's youth. These are said to be the duties of the Mahavidyas.97

Other groups of goddesses are identified with specific *siddhis *in some tantric texts. In the Srividya school of Tantrism, which is dominant in South India, we find a group of *tenyoginis *\(female beings endowed with magical powers\) who personify ten *siddhis: *the powers to make small, to become light, to become large, to become superior, to control others, to have an irresistible will, to enjoy, to gain all of one's desires, to obtain anything, and to control desires.98 In this case, the goddesses not only grant these powers but actually represent, or are identical with, them.

Individual Mahāvidyās are often associated with magical powers. Matarigi is said to give all kinds of *siddhis, *especially the power by which whatever one says comes true *\(vdk **siddhi\).99 *Kali has a long history of association with magical powers. In the Bengali *marigal **kavyas, *Kali is often the main deity and bestows magical powers on her devotees. In the *Kalikd**mangal-kdvya, *for example, the hero Sundara succeeds in finding and winning the heroine, Vidya, by means of magical powers acquired in worshiping Kali.100 In the *Sdkta-pramoda, *Siva says that Dhumavati is worshiped primarily for the *siddhi *of killing one's enemies.101 Also in the *Sdkta**pramoda *we read this prayer to Chinnamasta: "Give me *siddhis *and destroy my enemies."102 The Mahavidya who is most consistently associated with magical powers is Bagalamukhi. The *Bagaldmukhi-rahasya *says that she is worshiped for paralyzing, eradication, and control over the planets. Different recipes are given to achieve these different powers. To achieve the ability to kill at will, one should burn mustard oil and blood of a she-buffalo in a sacrificial fire, while for eradication one should burn the feathers of a crow and a vulture.103 The *Sdkta-pramoda *says that worship of Sodasi \(Tripura-sundari\) gives knowledge of all and makes one wealthy, immune to poison, authoritative in speech, and free from sickness.104





The importance of magical powers in the worship of the Mahāvidyās might be understood from at least two points of view. First, and perhaps obviously, worship generally can be prompted by specific desires, frustrations, and needs. A deity is approached for help. In this sense, it is not surprising to find the Mahāvidyās associated with granting a range of blessings and powers. Other deities also bestow a variety of blessings, including magical powers.

Second, the adept worships the Mahāvidyās by developing and employing mental capacities through meditation. Tantric yoga is supposed to awaken one's consciousness, to expand and intensify it. That magical powers as well as transformative wisdom might be associated with this process is understandable, and many of the magical powers that are specified relate directly to mental powers. In exploring and expanding one's consciousness, one discovers new dimensions to one's psychic capacities. Like the *kundalini *serpent rising and awakening the *cakras, *causing the lotuses to bloom, the adept awakens aspects or dimensions of his consciousness and realizes that his mental or psychic capacities are much greater than he might have imagined. Insofar as the Mahāvidyās might be thought of as aspects or stages of consciousness in the spiritual quest, the association *of **siddhis *with them is not surprising.



## The Significance of the Term *Mahāvidyā *

A literal translation of the term *mahavidya *is "great knowledge," while a somewhat less literal translation might be "supreme \(or superior or complete\) knowledge \(or wisdom\)." There are several possibilities for what the name tells us about the nature and function of the Mahāvidyās. It is not obvious why these ten goddesses should have been so designated, but several explanations are possible.





I have been told by two scholars of Tantrism in Varanasi105 that the term *dasamahavidya *as it applies to the ten goddesses is technical and means the "ten great mantras," *vidya *generally being used in this technical sense in tantric contexts. In his commentary on the *Lalitd-sahasrandma, *Bhaskararaya says: "The difference between *Mantra *and *Vidya *is that the former has reference to male deities and the latter to female ones."106 Indeed, the first order of business in many tantric texts that discuss or describe the Mahāvidyās is to give their mantras, which consist of a few syllables. The mantra, it is often said, is highly secret and extremely powerful. It is a given in the tantric context, in fact, that the mantra is identical with the goddess. It is not that the mantra *belongs **to *the goddess, which is the way one is often tempted to understand the relationship between the deity and the mantra; the situation, rather, is that the mantra *is *the goddess. Jan Gonda says: "The essence of a *mantra *... is the presence of the deity: only that *mantra *in which the *devata *has revealed his or her aspects can reveal that aspect. The deity is believed to appear from the *mantra *when it is correctly pronounced."107

There is a long-standing tradition in Hinduism that sound is the essence of reality. The idea *oisabda **brahman *is ancient: ultimate reality in its most essential form is expressed in sound. Philosophical schools of great sophistication, such as the Sphota school,108 are based on theories of sound and vibration as the essential and basic constituents of reality. Related to this emphasis on the priority of sound as basic to the nature of ultimate reality is the equally ancient emphasis in Hinduism on the potency of mantras, or sacred utterances. Reciting mantras, particularly Vedic mantras, is an essential part of most Hindu rituals. Indeed, many rituals are believed to be impotent unless qualified priests pronounce the mantras correctly. Traditionally, furthermore, only a select group of people, certain Brahmans, knew Vedic mantras and were prohibited from uttering them where they might be heard by unqualified people, such as women or any members of lower castes. Mantras were usually taken from sacred texts, and their power was believed to be almost unlimited; a highcaste male elite guarded them closely.

Similarly in tantric *sadhand, *the mantras that a *sadhaka *receives from his or her guru are secret and regarded as extremely powerful. The mantra of a goddess, for example, is transmitted to a *sddhaka *by a guru secretly in a ritual; the guru has chosen the particular mantra as suitable to the adept. Despite the impression that mantras are public because they are in printed editions of the *tantras *and that one might freely invoke them for their effect, mantras are in fact transmitted by a spiritual master during a carefully supervised spiritual undertaking.





The idea, then, that the ten goddesses who constitute the Mahāvidyās are essentially ten mantras, and that the term *dasamahavidya *may literally mean the "ten great mantras," is understandable. What is also significant is that the goddess—who is the mantra—appears or exists only when the mantra is invoked. She remains in latent form until a particular adept invokes her through the mantra that is her animating essence. It is in this sense, perhaps, that the emphasis upon the adept and the goddess being one might be understood in the tantric context. One cannot and does not exist without the other.

It is difficult, however, to leave the matter of the term *mahavidya **here. *Indeed, several people have commented on the significance of the term without emphasizing, or even mentioning, its reference to the mantras of the ten goddesses. The term *vidya *means "knowledge" and can refer to practical knowledge, knowledge of arts and sciences, or transformative knowledge. The name, then, according to some, is related to the idea that the ten goddesses bestow or reveal certain types of knowledge. One contemporary scholar says: "These \[the Mahāvidyās\] are the representatives of transcendent knowledge and power, the sources of all that is to be known."109 Another scholar refers to the Mahāvidyās as "ten objects of transcendental knowledge . . . signifying the various degrees and stages of existence."110 Another scholar says that the Mahāvidyās are so called because they are the "sources of all that is to be known."111 Yet another scholar maintains that the Mahadevi causes bondage and in this capacity is referred to as *avidya, *but that she also causes liberation and in this capacity is referred to as *vidya. *The ten Mahāvidyās, then, are ten forms in which the goddess brings about enlightenment by means of liberating knowledge.112 * *Yet another scholar equates *vidya *with *sakti, *which, he says, underlies and pervades all things. Indeed, he equates *vidya *with *brahman *itself, ultimate reality. *Vidya, *like *brahman, *is *saccidananda *\(being, consciousness, and bliss\). The Mahāvidyās, then, embody or transmit ultimate power and complete knowledge.113

Each of these interpretations of the term *mahavidya *goes beyond the technical meaning of "mantra" to apply the more encompassing meaning, "knowledge," to the ten goddesses. Viewing the goddesses as those who grant great knowledge or wisdom is in keeping with a general association between goddesses and knowledge throughout *sakta *literature. We find many textual references to goddesses, or the Great Goddess, as identical with, or associated with, knowledge and intellect or other mental attributes related to knowledge and wisdom. In the *DevF-mdhdtmya, *Durga is referred to as Mahavidya twice \(1.58 and 11.21\) and as Vidya \(1.44 and 4.8\). It is clear, furthermore, that her identification with *vidya *in these verses is related to liberating knowledge. Durga is also associated with *buddhi, *"intellect," four times in the *Devi-mahatmya.114 *In the concluding scene of the *Devi-mahatmya, *the goddess grants the merchant Samadhi liberating knowledge *\(video\) *\(13.16\). In the *Brahma-vaivaita**purdna, *Durga is also associated with *buddhi *and is called Buddhirupa, "she whose form is intellect."115 Durga is also identified with *cetand, *"consciousness," in the *Devi-mahatmya *\(5.13\). In the *Mahdbhagavata-purdna, *the goddess is said to be supreme knowledge, *pardvidyd, *and in this form to manifest herself in different goddesses: Gariga, Durga, Savitri, Laksmi, and Sarasvati.116 Several of the epithets included in the *Lalitd-sahas**randma, *a famous goddess hymn, identify the goddess with knowledge and wisdom: Mahabuddhi, "great intelligence" \(no. 2 2 3\), Vijnanabhanarupini, "she whose form is a mass of knowledge" \(no. 253\), Prajnatmika, "she who is wisdom itself" \(no. 261\), Mati, "intelligence" \(no. 445\), Vidya, "knowledge" \(no. 549\), Atmavidya, "knowledge of *dtman *\('self or soul\)" \(no. 583\), Mahavidya, "great knowledge" \(no. 584\), and Canada, "she who bestows knowledge" \(no. 643\).117 The *Devi-bhdga**vata-purdna *frequently refers to the principal goddess of the text as Vidya or Brahmavidya, "the knowledge of *brahman *\(the highest reality\)."118 Perhaps the earliest examples of female beings bearing the name Vidya are found in the *Mahdbhdrata. *A female being named Vidya is mentioned as a member of Parvati's entourage \(3.221.20\), and a group of female beings called the Vidyas are described attending the god Brahma \(2.n.15\).





The connection between the technical meaning of *mahavidya *as "great mantra" and interpretations that emphasize the term as meaning "knowledge" or "wisdom" resides in the tantric belief that mantras awaken consciousness and expand the senses and intellect. The difference is only one of means and ends. Mantras are the means to realizing the goal of knowledge. In this sense, the ten Mahāvidyās are the ten great mantras by means of which knowledge is gained, awakened, or discovered within.





## Concluding Observations

The ten Mahāvidyās form a distinctive group of deities. Although it includes some well-known goddesses, such as Kali and Laksmi, most of them are little known apart from this group, and several of the goddesses are strikingly unusual \(Chinnamasta, Dhumavatl, and Bagalamukhi in particular\). The group does not particularly manifest characteristics and functions that typify *sakta *Hinduism, yet they are often said to represent the Mahadevi in her diverse forms. Several texts and secondary sources imply that they sum up, or circumscribe in some fashion, the main features of the Mahadevl. Nonetheless, the group lacks many features considered central to *sakta *theology and religion.

For example, the group lacks the close association with sacred places that is an important feature of Hindu goddess traditions. Kali, outside the Mahāvidyās, has many famous temples, and at these sacred places she is often connected to the myth of *the **sakta **pithas, *which has a geographical theme. The most famous of such Kali temples is Kalighat \(after which the city of Calcutta is named\). Similarly, apart from the Mahāvidyās, Tara has several important sacred places. Taraplth in Birbhum district of Bengal is perhaps the most famous. Laksmi \(Kamala\) also has many wellknown temples of regional or local importance that tie her to the local culture and land. However, this geographical aspect of Kali, Tara, and Kamala is barely even mentioned in the context of their roles among the Mahāvidyās. The texts that discuss and describe the Mahāvidyās do not seem to be interested in reflecting upon or promoting the ways in which these goddesses are associated with sacred geography in their independent cults. In the same vein, the *sakta **pitha *myth is rarely mentioned, even though in the myth the *pithas *all arise from the body of Sati, who is the origin of the Mahāvidyās in the *puranic *accounts \(see above\). It is also interesting that the Mahāvidyās as a group and individually are rarely associated with such geographical goddesses as Gariga, even though the *Mahabhdgavata-purana *tells the stories of both Gariga and the origin of the Mahāvidyās. It is difficult to resist the conclusion that the meaning and function of the Mahāvidyās are only very weakly related to sacred geography, even though it is often extremely important in the case of other goddesses and goddess cults. To use Diana Eck's expression, the Mahāvidyās, as a group and as individuals, lack a clear "locative aspect," which is a particularly distinctive feature of Hinduism and much Hindu goddess worship.119 The Mahāvidyās have little or no connection with "organic symbols" of the sacred,120 such as mountains, rivers, river banks, or river confluences.





The Mahāvidyās lack another characteristic that typifies many Hindu goddesses. They have little or no connection with motherhood, fecundity, and growth. Although they may have names that connect them with creation in a general way, particularly in their *nama **stotras *\(hymns consisting of names or epithets\), they are not depicted as mothers, and they are rarely referred to by maternal epithets. Similarly, they are only very weakly connected with fecundity and growth, which are important themes in the cults of other goddesses, even in the cults of Kamala and Kali apart from their associations with the Mahavidyas.121 The Mahavidyas are seldom worshiped for progeny or fertility.

Another notable feature of Hindu goddesses is their role as consorts. Many of them are associated with particular gods as wives or consorts. Among the Mahāvidyās this role is extremely weak. They are almost always depicted or described without reference to a consort. Although they may bear epithets in their *nama **stotras *that associate them with a male deity, usually Siva, he is rarely depicted with them, and when he is, he is subordinate to them. For example, Kali and Tara are shown standing on his supine body, and Tripura-sundarl is shown sitting on a throne whose legs are the four male gods \(Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, and Rudra\). Both as a group and as individual goddesses within the group, the Mahāvidyās are independent. It is particularly striking in the case of Kamala, who is otherwise known to be Visnu's consort, that he is not depicted with her when she is shown as one of the Mahāvidyās. Her *dhydna *mantra describes her without him, preferring the very ancient image of Gaja-laksmi, in which she is flanked by elephants showering her with water from their trunks or from pots. It is not her wifely associations and functions that are significant in her role as a Mahavidya.

The function of the Mahāvidyās in maintaining cosmic order, dharma, is also weak. For many goddesses, particularly the demon-slaying Durga, their role as guardian and maintainer of dharma is central. As we have discussed above, the Mahadevi's assumption of appropriate forms to defeat demons and maintain cosmic balance and harmony is an important facet *oisakta *theology in many texts. Indeed, the Mahāvidyās are sometimes compared to the *avataras *of Vishnu, or the *avataras *are said to be identical with or to have arisen from the Mahāvidyās. Their *name **stotras *also give individual Mahāvidyās epithets that suggest a world-maintaining role. Their iconography and mythology, however, do not emphasize it, for the Mahāvidyās as a group or as individuals.

Although the Mahāvidyās are not strongly associated with geographical features or maternal, consort, or dharma-upholding functions, they do have other characteristics that might help us begin to understand their distinctive nature as a group and as individual goddesses. The Mahāvidyās are independent deities, having only a weak connection with a male deity. In the case of individual Mahavidya who are known to be consorts of male deities outside the context of the Mahavidya cult, such as Kali, Tara, and Kamala, this association is played down or ignored when they are approached as Mahāvidyās. Even the origin myth of the Mahāvidyās, though featuring Sati, Siva's wife, stresses her decision to act independently of her husband and her success in bending him to her will. When the Mahāvidyās as individuals are shown with a male consort, they dominate him, standing on his supine body, assuming the "superior" position in sexual intercourse, or sitting on a throne or couch supported by male deities. In short, where male deities do appear, they are subordinate and subservient to the Mahāvidyās.





The Mahāvidyās, with a few exceptions, are fearsome. They dwell or are worshiped in cremation grounds, sit on corpses, wear garlands of severed heads or skulls, are naked and smeared with blood, and have disheveled hair. They tend to be rough, not soft, in nature. This fierce aspect overshadows their boon-conferring, indulgent nature.

In the context of Tantrism, and in terms of many of their names, they are associated with *sadhana *\(spiritual exercises\). They are associated also with mental and psychic powers *\(siddhis\) *and heightened states of consciousness.

Finally, they are associated with mantras. They are mantras, they exist where their mantras are uttered, and their most essential form is as mantras. They are, unquestionably, powerful sounds. In this respect, they are tied inextricably to human beings, without whom they would remain only latent. It is when a *sadhaka *invokes the mantra of a goddess that she "comes alive." The Mahāvidyās, that is, as mantras, represent or symbolize aspects of awareness, consciousness, or mental capacity associated with mantra *sadhana *\(spiritual discipline that employs sacred sounds\). In a sense we could say that each Mahavidya represents a style of spirituality appropriate to the *sadhaka *as determined by the guru who has bequeathed to him or her a special mantra, that is, a special goddess.

Next we will turn our attention to the individual Mahāvidyās. We will often find ideas and themes that apply to the Mahāvidyās as a group being reiterated and emphasized in the iconography and mythology of a particular goddess. On the other hand, each goddess also has her peculiarities: unique features that are only weakly stressed in the group as a whole.




