+++
title = "3 Concluding Reflections"

+++



Having focused on the Mahavidyas as a group and on each of them individually, I would like to comment on a few particularly striking features or motifs and seek to answer certain questions related to these features.



## Corpses and Cremation Grounds

Corpses are remarkably often associated with the Mahavidyas, and cremation grounds seem to be highly favored as places in which to worship them. Kali, Tārā, Bagalamukhi, Tripura-sundari, Matarigi, and Bhairavi are all said to stand or sit upon corpses. Kali, Tārā, Chinnamasta, and Dhumavati are often described or pictured as dwelling in cremation grounds. On several occasions the *Mantra-mahodadhih *stipulates that *sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor\) should be done while sitting on a corpse or on a place where a corpse has recently been buried. For example, in an almost matter-of-fact way, the text says: "Bringing a corpse on a Tuesday or Saturday, . . . bury it one foot deep in the ground beneath the door of the house. Then, sitting on that spot, . . . perform 108 Japas \[repetitions\] every day. . . . Through such a Japa for eight days the *\[sadhaka, *"adept"\] becomes the lord of various Siddhis \["perfections," magical powers\]."1 The same text, again, instructs the *sadhaka *as follows: "Sitting on a Savasana \[a corpse seat\] . . . the Sadhaka should begin the Japa at sunrise and continue it without break till the next sunrise.





Through such a \[process\] the Sadhaka becomes fearless and master of various Siddhis."2 In discussing the empowerment or perfection of mantras, which is accomplished primarily by repetition, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *says: "A Sadhaka who, sitting on a corpse, performs one lakh \(100,000\) \[repetitions\] of this mantra, his mantra becomes potent and all his cherished desires are soon fulfilled."3 In discussing the relative power of different "seats," the *Mantra-mahodadhih *describes the *komaldsana, *which uses an aborted fetus or the corpse of a five-year-old child, and the *vistardsana, *which is made of woven grass and "consecrated with a corpse."4 The *Tantrasdra, *a text devoted primarily to the Mahavidyas, has detailed descriptions of both *savd **sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor with a corpse\)5 and *citd **sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor on a cremation pyre\).6 These rituals are not described as applicable to a particular goddess among the Mahavidyas, so probably both techniques are appropriate in the worship of any, or at least several, of the Mahavidyas.

It is important to reflect on these associations if we wish to come to an understanding of certain individual Mahavidyas and of the group as a whole. As a group, they seem to be associated with a type of spirituality that relies heavily on death imagery. This is perhaps most explicit in the case of Kali, the first and most important of the group. But corpses and cremation grounds are central in descriptions of several of the other goddesses as well, and worship of nearly all of them is said to be most effective if undertaken in a cremation ground.

It is tempting to suppose that this death imagery belongs to the ascetic, world-denying vein of Hinduism, in which renunciation of worldly desire is central. In such a context, death imagery and death rituals make sense: they reinforce the renunciant's decision to pursue spiritual liberation by giving up the lures of the world. Meditation upon death puts worldly pleasures in a perspective where their attraction can be minimized or subverted altogether.7 And surely corpses and cremation grounds do play this role in Mahavidya *sadhand. *

The cremation ground also plays the role of a "forbidden thing," a kind of sixth *tattva, *which the heroic *sadhaka *must confront in order to glimpse the underlying nature of reality, which is that all things, no matter how polluted or terrible, are pervaded by *s'akti *\(energy or power\) \(see the chapter on Kali\). To meditate upon, to meditate in, or to live in a cremation ground functions as a spiritual test. In what has been termed the *"samadhi *\[heightened or intensified consciousness\] of horror,"8 the adept discovers a distaste for the world, which encourages him or her to see beyond or through its lures to underlying spiritual truths. The goddess herself is sometimes described as putting the male gods through similar tests. In the *Mahabhagavata-purana, *she assumes a terrible form to test Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. To avoid looking at her, Brahma turns his head away, and Visnu closes his eyes and plunges into the water. Only Siva is able to continue to gaze on her, and for this heroic ability she gives him the blessing of becoming a great yogi.9 In a similar scenario, the goddess appears to the three male gods as a rotting corpse. Siva thinks her stench is fragrant incense, and he takes her corpse on his breast. The goddess blesses him by placing his *Iirigam *in her yoni.10 The tantric *sadhaka *is tested, as it were, in the cremation ground. The challenge is for the spiritual aspirant to be able to perceive the presence of the goddess even in the most terrible and polluting objects and places.





There is some evidence that cremation grounds are sometimes used for initiation into certain tantric cults.11 Insofar as initiation rites often involve the symbolic death and rebirth of the initiate,12 a cremation ground seems an appropriate venue. It is a place of transformation, where people die to one mode of being and are born to another. It is the locale of the greatest human transformation, that from life to death. If the candidate's initiation into a tantric cult is meant to signify dramatic transformation, the cremation ground is a most suitable place for it.

However, something beyond this seems to be involved in the use of corpses and cremation grounds, for it is often clear that people undertaking these rituals are householders who have not renounced the world, are not engaged in ascetic practices, do not seem primarily concerned with affirming the underlying divinity of the forbidden or the polluted, and are not undergoing initiation into a tantric cult. It is also clear that the desires that motivate this type of spirituality are often worldly: power over one's enemies, kingly authority, eloquence in speech, and so on. The aim of this *sddbana, *that is, seems to be, not so much to triumph over the lures of the world or even to see through its illusory facade to its underlying reality as *sakti, *but rather to gain success and well-being in the world. Corpses and cremation grounds seem to function as more than dramatic reminders of the transience of worldly existence and the futility of physical and mental desires, and thus as appropriate accoutrements or contexts for the spiritual quest. They also seem to function as objects and places of power by means of which or in which extraordinary achievements may be accomplished. Power seems to accrue to the individual who associates with corpses and frequents cremation grounds. Why might this be so?

It is clear that texts describing the Mahavidyas and their worship assume the existence of a world of spirits that is parallel to the physical world and impinges upon it. This assumption persists in and to a great extent dominates contemporary Hinduism in both its popular and its refined, literary forms. The inhabitants of this world include gods, goddesses, *raksasas, **asuras, **vetdlas,yoginis, **ddkinis, **gandhai~vas, **kinnaras, **siddhas, **bhutas, **pretas, **pisacas, **ndgas, *and other classes of beings that are not visible under usual conditions but that appear from time to time in the physical world. All of these beings are more powerful than humans or have some ability or cunning that surpasses normal human abilities. Their eruptions into the visible world of human beings can be beneficial or harmful, unexpected or willed. Examples of harmful and unexpected eruptions are illnesses, bad luck, and accidents. These are often attributed to the actions of *bhutas *and *pretas *\(spirits of the dead, ghosts\), but also to other inimical spirits or deities. Such eruptions may result from either bad karma on the part of the victim \(who caused the disease by wicked deeds or thoughts\) or unsatisfied passions or desires on the part of the spirit being, who tries to fulfill them by possessing the human victim. Much of Hindu belief and practice concerns warding off or dealing with such inimical intrusions into human affairs.





On the other hand, another large part of Hindu ritual and practice deliberately seeks contact with this invisible world for a variety of purposes, and it is in this context that much tantric ritual probably should be understood. Tantric rituals in many cases are clearly aimed at crossing the barrier between the visible and invisible worlds, either by allowing the *sadhaka *to enter the spirit world or by enticing or forcing spirit beings to appear in the visible world. The goal of the *sadhaka *is often made explicit: to gain a blessing, usually in the form of some kind of power or ability, from a being in the spirit world, usually a deity, often one of the Mahavidyas. Contacting the spirit world deliberately \(as opposed to being contacted by it unexpectedly\) is also assumed to be both difficult and dangerous, and often terrifying. This is where the importance of corpses and cremation grounds becomes understandable in tantric worship.

Where might one hope to contact the unseen, spiritual world? Where might the barrier between the visible and invisible worlds be most permeable? One place is certainly the cremation ground. It is where all human beings eventually and inevitably make contact with the spirit world as they pass from life to death. Indeed, to a great extent this is precisely what death is, the transition from one mode of being to another, from that of a physical to a nonphysical being. The cremation ground is the "terminal" where such transitions routinely take place. In this sense, it represents a more-or-less-permanent "opening" to the spirit world and the beings that inhabit it. It is a place of spirit traffic, of coming and going from one world to another.13 It is a liminal place,14 betwixt and between worlds, where radical transformations take place and contact between worlds is relatively common.

Corpses, particularly of the recent dead, are vehicles with which one can move from one world to the other. A recently dead person, particularly if the proper death rituals have not yet been done, still hovers in the physical world while already having been transformed into a spirit being. He or she is a liminal being, with a foot in both worlds, as it were. He or she is on the way to the "other world"; to ride that person's corpse, or otherwise associate with or dominate it, is to make that transition also. References to reviving or gaining control over a corpse, or the spirit that inhabits it, are not infrequent. The *Uddisa-tantra *gives mantras for reviving a corpse.15 The *Kathasaritsagara *also mentions revitalizing corpses, gaining control over them in order to use them at will, and acquiring the ability to fly by eating human flesh.16 Elsewhere we read: "Dead and putrefying corpses submerged near cremation grounds are still brought to life by the force of the sadhaka's mantras, and made to render aid to sadhana and siddhi."17 These references make clear that a corpse is a numinous object particularly useful for making contact with the spirit world and acquiring powers and abilities associated with spirit beings.





## Skulls and Severed Heads

Another remarkable feature of Mahavidya iconography is the prevalence of skulls and chopped-off heads. Kali, Tārā, Chinnamasta, Matarigi, and Bhairavi all wear garlands of skulls or severed heads and are often said to hold a freshly cut head or a skull in their hands. Skulls also adorn Tara's forehead and sometimes Kali's hair. Some texts devoted to worship of the Mahavidyas also prescribe skulls as seats upon which effective *sadhana *may be performed. The *Mantra-mahodadhih *stipulates that the *sadhaka *should bring a human skull to a remote place in the woods, purify it, bury it, and perform worship while seated on that spot.18 The most dramatic example of a chopped-off head in the context of the Mahavidyas, of course, is that of Chinnamasta, who has severed her own head. Although I commented upon the significance of skulls and choppedoff heads in the discussion of Chinnamasta,19 their prevalence among the Mahavidyas generally deserves further comment.

Perhaps the most obvious interpretation of these skulls and heads concerns head offerings. Animal \(and sometimes human\) sacrifice was fairly common in the Hindu tradition, and the typical way of killing the victim was by decapitation. During the Vedic period, animal sacrifices were commonly offered to many deities; later, most blood sacrifices were directed to goddesses. In contemporary Hinduism, which continues a tradition that is hundreds of years old, blood sacrifice is still almost invariably associated with certain goddesses. At some goddess temples, daily sacrifices are made, usually of goats and chickens. In almost all cases the animal's head is cut off and offered to the image of the goddess, often on a platter. The *Tantrasara *devotes a section to *ball, *"blood sacrifice," and makes it clear that the proper method of killing the victim \(which according to the text may be a human being\) is by decapitation.20 The chopped-off heads that several of the Mahavidyas wear or sit upon can be thought of as sacrificial offerings. That these human heads are always male in Mahavidya iconography is still reflected in contemporary practice, which uses male animals almost exclusively.





Another interpretation of skulls and severed heads also seems possible, however, and is more in line with the importance of corpses and cremation grounds in Mahavidya worship and iconography. The severed head \(or skull\), especially when worn as an ornament by one of the Mahavidya goddesses, might be thought of as symbolic of transformed consciousness. By means of spiritual exercises in the cremation ground and with corpses, the *sddhaka *seeks a direct encounter with the spirit world in order to acquire powers associated with spirit beings: superior power, or even omnipotence; expanded knowledge, or omniscience; transcendence of time and space, including precognition and clairvoyance; and the ability to change form at will, to become small or light, or to fly.21 In short, the adept seeks to transcend in some manner the limitations of the physical, earth-bound human condition by direct association with the spirit world.

That these spirit powers often denote transcendence of corporeal limitations and the expansion of consciousness, the ability of the consciousness to drift free of the body and roam at will, suggests a divorce of body and mind, the liberation of the mind from the body. Those chopped-off heads and skulls might be symbolic of *sddhakas *who, by a particular goddess's blessing or their own efforts, have accomplished these feats. They might be thought of as symbolic of transformed consciousness in two ways: First, they have achieved the status of spirit beings by having died; the theme of symbolic death in many religions functions in just this way, namely, to dramatically denote a drastic change in status.22 Second, the severed heads may denote consciousness that has transcended the limitations of physical, worldly existence: the mind \(symbolized by the head\) has left the body and is no longer attached to or limited by it.

A common motif in the world's religions is the quest by a spiritual master to acquire techniques for transcending the human condition. The shaman and the mystic are examples of this. Both undertake spiritual journeys to achieve an unmediated and transformative experience of the spirit world, and to achieve it they must often undergo a symbolic death and dismemberment. The shaman is often said to be torn asunder by spiritual beings, who then reconstitute his or her body with indestructible pieces, signifying a new, transcendent condition. Just such a dismemberment was described by Pagal Haranath \(b. 1865\), a Bengali Vaisnava. While traveling in Kashmir, he fell into a deep trance. Caitanya, the famous Bengali Vaisnava reformer, appeared to him, divided his body into sixty-four parts, and then proceeded to clean and purify them. When his body was reassembled, Haranath had acquired magical, shamanic powers, that is, expanded consciousness.23





Mystics often pass through a "dark night of the soul," in which they feel as if they have died, before experiencing the bliss of union with the divine. In the cremation ground, in association with corpses, tantric *sddhakas *undergo a symbolic death before entering the spirit world, where they are reconstituted as spiritual beings equipped with spiritual powers that go beyond the limitations of earthly existence. The severed heads that the goddesses wear might signify both the symbolic death and the transcendent consciousness of successful *sadhakas. *That all of these chopped-off heads seem to wear a look of peace and satisfaction seems to confirm this interpretation.



## Sexuality and Awakened Consciousness

Mahavidya iconography, mythology, worship, and ritual are dominated by implicit and explicit sexual symbolism. Sexual intercourse is explicitly portrayed in the *dhydna *mantras and portraits of Kali, Chinnamasta, and Tara,24 and most of the individual Mahavidyas are described as sexually attractive and powerful. The mythology concerning the origin of certain individual Mahavidya goddesses \(for example, Chinnamasta and Matarigi\) stresses sexual tension. The yantras that represent the Mahavidyas contain implicitly sexual symbols, and the central metaphor of awakening *kundalini **sakti *may be interpreted as the arousal of sexual energy. It is also the case that most of the Mahavidyas may be worshiped through the *panca **tattva *ritual, in which sexual intercourse is the culminating act. The centrality of sexual imagery in Mahavidya worship and iconography deserves further comment and analysis at this point. Sexual imagery in Mahavidya materials must be related to the tantric philosophy and ritual that are its primary religious context. This imagery can be understood on several different, but related, levels. On the most abstract level, sexual imagery reflects the tantric vision of reality as the dynamic interaction and tension between the two great principles, Siva and Satki. As the basic underlying principles of reality, the basic components of the essential texture of the cosmos, Siva and Sakti obviously may be understood in a wide variety of ways. Several sophisticated philosophical systems have been constructed on the meaning and interpretation of these two principles, Kashmir Saivism perhaps being the most impressive. Siva and Sakti are present in the mutual attraction and complementarity of the sexes. At the level of human existence and human relationships, they are inherent and embodied in individual males and females. In the context of Tantra, sexual attraction, sexual behavior, and sexual intercourse suggest the underlying texture of reality, which is the manifestation of the dynamic, energetic, creative, and harmonious interaction of Siva and Sakti.





At a more concrete, but still fairly coded, level, sexual imagery suffuses the yantras and *mandalas *associated with all of the Mahavidya goddesses \(as it does tantric *mandala *structure and symbolism generally\). The dominant forms of the yantra—the triangle and the lotus—both have sexual connotations. The triangle, particularly when it is pointing downward, is symbolic of the vulva. An upward-pointing triangle is sometimes held to represent the phallus. When the two are superimposed on each other, as in most of the yantras representing the individual Mahavidyas, they denote sexual union. Another feature of yantra design is the presence of a small dot, called a *bindu, *in the very center of the diagram. This dot is often said to represent either the two principles of Siva and Sakti in union or the male seed, particularly when it is enclosed in a downward-pointing triangle at the center of the yantra. The lotus also has sexual connotations. It is often a symbol of generation, that from which all creation proceeds or that in which all creation is contained. As it opens and blossoms, the cosmos emerges. In this sense it represents the womb from which the world is born and may be associated with the womb or sexual organ of Sakti, from whom creation emerges and in whom it is contained.

The yantras representing the Mahavidyas are also charged with a group of powers—male and female deities—who are located at various points in the design. The *sadhaka *places these powers in the yantra while either drawing or imagining it during *sadhand. *In many of the Mahavidya yantras, the petals of the inner lotus are charged with the presence of different forms of Rati and Kama, deities associated in particular with sexual vitality and desire. In general structure, then, the Mahavidya yantras may be understood as schematic renderings of sexual imagery and containers of sexual power. As schematic representations of both the goddess in question and the cosmos generally, which she is held to embody, the yantra again expresses the idea that reality in its basic nature is sexually charged.





The yoni, in turn, is interpreted as a yantra. It is said to contain, in essential form, all aspects of the cosmos in microcosm. The *Yoni-tantra, *in describing yoni *piija, *says that the yoni is a manifestation of the Devi \(the Great Goddess\). The Devl, furthermore, is said to manifest herself in the form of the Mahavidyas. Each of the Mahavidyas is identified with a different part of the yoni.25

In Mahavidya iconography, sexual imagery is often explicit. Kali and Tārā are sometimes shown copulating with Siva; a copulating couple, usually identifiable as Kama and Rati, figures in Chinnamasta and Tārā iconography. Sexual motifs and activity also figure prominently in certain tantric rituals associated with the Mahavidyas. In the *panca **makara *or *panca **tattva *ritual, the culminating act, the fifth *makara, *is *maithuna, *in which the *sadhaka *and his *sakti *perform sexual intercourse. This act as described in the *Tantrasara *is highly ritualized.26 It involves the careful purification of many elements and a lengthy worship by the *sadhaka *of his female companion \(the text is written from the male point of view\). Some interpreters have suggested that the primary aim of the ritual is for the *sadhaka *to demonstrate that he has mastered his sexual desires. They claim that the male does not ejaculate during intercourse but redirects his semen "upward" or inward, thereby controlling and channeling his sexual energy to achieve spiritual ends.27 In the *Tantrasara, *however, it is clear that the man ejaculates into the woman; as he does so, he says a particular prayer comparing his ejaculation to an offering: "The fire *oiatman *has been made blazing by the offering of clarified butter; by means of my mind ladle I am ever engaged in offering the modality of my senses through the *susimmd *channels."28 This utterance implies, not that the *sadhaka *withholds his semen, but that he interprets his ejaculation as part of a process that awakens *kundalini**sakti. *It is not sublimated or curbed sexual activity that awakens the *kundalini*"but sexual activity properly understood or perhaps properly appreciated.29

Sexual imagery in Mahavidya iconography and worship plays a symbolic role. It may be understood metaphorically as suggesting the dynamic polar rhythm of reality, the interaction of Siva and Sakti that creates and suffuses the cosmos. The *Kularnava-tantra *says that the world does not bear the likeness of the *cakra, *the lotus, or the thunderbolt but rather the likeness of the *lirigam *and yoni, thus reflecting the form of Siva and Sakti; wherever there is the union of the two, "the devotee experiences deep trance *\[samadbi\]."30 *Sexual imagery may also symbolize awakening consciousness. The rising of *kundalini**sakti *and the bliss of her union with Siva in the *sahasrdra **cakra *may be symbolized by sexual union. Sexual activity seems an appropriate metaphor for the rousing of the *kundalini, *as both are highly energetic processes accompanied by heightened awareness. It seems likely that in some cases sexual imagery reflects actual practice, as in the *panca **tattva *ritual, where sexual intercourse may be used as a means of awakening *kundalini **sakti. *Substitutes may be used in the ritual, however, which implies that sexual intercourse is not necessary to the awakening of the *kundalini. *Tantric texts sometimes warn that only those of a certain accomplished character and heroic nature should engage in this ritual. To suggest that explicit sexual activity is a necessary part of Mahavidya worship would be an exaggeration. On the other hand, sexual practices clearly have a role, and for some *sadhakas *in some situations, sexual intercourse may lead to an intense spiritual experience.





## The Conjunction of Death and Sexual Imagery

It is striking that imagery of both sex and death should be so central in Mahavidya materials and that both are so often juxtaposed in the characterization of a goddess and in certain rituals of worship. Kali, Tārā, and Chinnamasta, in particular, often combine both types of imagery in their icons. In an eighteenth-century Kangra painting, Tārā stands on Kama and Rati, who are copulating on a cremation fire.31 Kali is sometimes shown copulating with Siva in a cremation ground,32 and Chinnamasta decapitates herself while standing or sitting on Rati, who is having sexual intercourse with Kama. It is not unusual for the copulating couple on whom Chinnamasta stands or leans to be lying on a cremation fire. There are also examples of Chinnamasta having intercourse with Siva while he lies on a cremation pyre and she decapitates herself \(see figure 24\).

These are only the most dramatic examples of the juxtaposition of death and sexual imagery. Certain Mahavidya texts prescribe equally shocking juxtapositions in their descriptions of rituals appropriate to Mahavidya worship. In its section on Tārā, for example, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *says that the *sadhaka *who seeks lordship should sit naked on the heart of a corpse in a cremation ground and offer the goddess one thousand flowers, each covered with his semen, while reciting her mantra.33 The same section of the text describes a ritual in which the *sadhaka *should imagine the goddess seated on the chest of a corpse engaged in sex with her consort on a fifteen-petaled lotus while the *sadhaka *is also having sexual intercourse.34 Also in the section on Tārā, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *mentions a ritual in which the *sadhaka *places a human skull at the place where he is to recite the goddess's mantra. Then, while repeating the mantra, he is to gaze upon, touch, and sexually enjoy 2 woman.35 The *Uddisa-tantra *gives directions for improving the erotic appeal of a woman, which are followed immediately by rules governing *sava **sadhana *\(spiritual endeavor using a corpse\).36





What might this juxtaposition of sex and death imagery mean? I would suggest two interpretations. First, tantric *sadhana, *which is so intimately associated with Mahavidya worship, places a premium upon direct, unmediated experience. As mentioned above, tantric *sadhana *is secret and private. It is undertaken by an individual in a lonely place. Priests are not necessary, and while the *sddhaka's *guru may be present, or the *sadhaka *may take part in a collective ritual on rare occasions, it is primarily a lone adept who undertakes the rituals described in Mahavidya and related tantric texts. The texts are also explicit concerning at least one of the aims *of **sadhana: *to become one with the deity being worshiped, or to be blessed with a vision of the deity—a transformative and probably intense experience. We may typify the tantric *sadhaka *as someone who seeks concrete religious experience, for whom rituals are a means to experiencing an intensity of feeling and emotion. Both dying and sex are overwhelming human experiences that can leave a person uprooted from and unprotected by social conventions and ritual insulation. Both, of course, are highly ritualized in almost every culture, precisely because the intense emotions they engender are so apt to cause social disruption. But no amount of ritual can guarantee the taming or orderly channeling of either of these basic human experiences. It is the "explosive" nature of death and sex imagery that makes them so central in tantric *sadhana, *which puts such a premium on achieving transformative religious experiences. As symbols they are particularly powerful in evoking feelings that can deeply affect and alter a person; they can trigger the kind of experience the *sadhaka *seeks.

Second, the juxtaposition of death and sex imagery appropriately expresses the nature of reality as constant and simultaneous inceptioncreation and destruction. The waxing and waning of all beings and all things, from individual organisms to the infinite cosmos itself, is appropriately suggested in the simultaneous presentation of sex and death imagery. If such juxtaposed imagery shocks us, it is because we are in the habit of masking the destructive dimension of reality so insistently that its inevitable appearance is upsetting. That sex and death imagery "do not belong together," that we find the juxtaposition in "bad taste," is simply an admission that our view of reality is warped and unrealistic. Those Mahavidya goddesses who juxtapose sex and death imagery are icons of revelation to the *sddhaka, *who seeks an expanded consciousness, an awareness of the truth of things that does not pander to wishful thinking concerning one's own mortality and frailty. They are images that help the *sddhaka *tear the veil *oimdyd *\(illusion grounded in self-infatuation\).





## The Roles of Women and Reverence for Women

It is striking how central female imagery and women are in Mahavidya and related tantric materials. Theologically, the goddess, or Sakti, in one form or another is equal or superior to a male deity or principal, usually Siva. She is usually identified with the origin of the cosmos and is said to infuse it and contain it. Frequently in Mahadevi texts she empowers the male gods to create, maintain, and consume the creation, or she undertakes these functions herself. Iconographically, the individual Mahavidya goddesses are shown dominating male deities. Kali and Tārā stand on, sit on, or have sex astride Siva. Other Mahavidyas sit on male corpses. Tripura-sundari sits on the body of Siva, which in turn rests on a couch whose legs are four male deities. None of the Mahavidyas is shown in the role of a traditional Hindu wife or consort. Even Laksml, who is widely known for her loyal and subservient position as Visnu's wife, is shown alone. It is also noteworthy that the severed heads that decorate the goddesses' bodies are male, as are the corpses that lie beneath them. When animal sacrifice is included in worship, male animals are offered.

Moreover, Mahavidya and related tantric texts often mention the importance of revering women.37 The *Kauldvali-tantra *says that all women should be looked upon as manifestations of the Mahadevi \(great goddess\).38 The *Nila-tantra *says that one should desert one's parents, guru, and even the deities before insulting a woman.39





Several rituals involve the worship of individual women. At several points in the*panca **tattva *ritual, particularly during *maithuna, *the *sadhaka *does elaborate worship of his *sakti. *According to the description of the ritual in the *Tantrasdra, *he begins by mentally worshiping the goddess and several different groups of women: dancing girls, Kapalikas \("those who bear skulls," a particular type of religious adept\), prostitutes, and women of the barber, washerman, and cowherd castes.40 These groups are all either low caste or socially or religiously liminal. It is from one of these groups that the *sadhaka *recruits the woman who is to be his *sakti *in the ritual. The significance of the low-caste or liminal status of these women may relate to a general theme of the ritual, which affirms as sacred what is ordinarily viewed as forbidden or polluting and uses it to worship the goddess, who pervades all things. By worshiping women of lower castes, or women who are socially or religiously marginal, the adept reverses the normal hierarchy of respect. By revering such women, he affirms their underlying and essential divinity as concrete manifestations of the goddess. He affirms as divine that which is normally disdained or shunned.41

During the rituals directly related to *maithuna, *the theme of worshiping the woman as the goddess is persistent. Having performed *bhiita **suddhi *and *nyasa *on her body to purify and divinize the woman, the *sadhaka *directs her to sit on a bed, which he then worships as a *pith **a *of the goddess. This sacred spot is imagined to be the center of the world and is pictured as a lotus supported by the cosmic serpent in the depths of the cosmic ocean. On the lotus sits the goddess, represented by the *sadhaka''s **sakti. *The *sadhaka *then worships the woman's body: By means of mantras, he "deposits" in her limbs the five forms of Kama-deva, the god of sexual desire. Again using mantras, he divinizes her breasts or empowers them with sacred energy by "depositing" there the deities Vasanta \(who personifies the amorous season of spring\) and Kama. Her forehead is imagined to have the moon adorning it \(as is the case with many of the Mahavidya goddesses\), and both her right and left sides are imagined as suffused with divine beings. The *sadhaka *then worships her vagina, which should be seen to have three channels, representing the moon, sun, and fire. From the moon channel flows water, from the sun channel flows menstrual fluid, and from the fire channel, which is in the middle, flows seed. He should then worship the two goddesses Bhagamala and Bhagamalini \(both names mean "having a garland of yonis"\), in addition to his own chosen deity, as residing in the *saktfs *vagina.42 He should also at this point worship his own penis as representing Siva. In short, the *sadhaka * ritually transforms sexual intercourse into a cosmic event that unites Siva and Sakti.





Some tantric texts also mention ritual worship of a woman preceding sexual intercourse outside the context *of **the **panca **tattva *ritual, which suggests that the tantric *sadhaka *should routinely view intercourse as a sacred ritual in which or by which one realizes one's cosmic identity. The *Guptasadhand-tantra, *for example, directs the adept to worship his wife, or the wife of another, by washing her feet with water, then worshiping her forehead, face, throat, heart, navel, breasts, and vagina by repeating one hundred mantras of his chosen deity. At the time of ejaculation, the *sadhaka *is to offer his semen to Siva and imagine the *sakti *as his chosen deity.43 The *Kubjikd-tantra, *similarly, instructs the *sadhaka, *outside the context of the *panca **tattva *ritual, to worship his wife while she is drunk and lying on a bed. He is to view her as a goddess and, while repeating mantras, should touch her heart with his heart, her vagina with his penis, and her face with his face, thus symbolizing the uniting of Siva and Sakti.44

The *Yogini-tantra *says that yoni *Mid, *worship of the vulva, is the best of all methods of worship.45 The *Kdmdkhyd-tantra *instructs the *sadhaka *to worship the goddess in the genitals of his *sakti.46 *The *Mdyd-tantra *enjoins the adept to imagine his chosen deity residing in the yoni of a woman "who is not his own" in order to obtain perfection.47 The *Sarvolldsa-tantra *of Sarvananda, citing the *Vrhad-yoni-tantra, *discusses the downwardpointing triangle, the symbol of the yoni, as containing Brahma, Visnu, and Siva on its three sides, and also most of the Mahavidyas. In short, the text says, the triangle is the Great Goddess herself, the abode of all deities. Kali is said to dwell on all three sides of the triangle, which is identical with the yoni. Tārā is above it, Bhuvaneśvarī and Tripura-sundari are inside it, Bhairavi is at its root. Chinnamasta abides inside the hole in the triangle, and at the end \(perhaps deep within\) dwells Dhumavati, who emerges from there \(perhaps with menstrual flow\).48 At the root of the hair of the yoni dwells Mahakali, while Matarigi resides in the folds of skin below the navel. Covering the whole area are Kamala and Kamakhya.49 The same text, citing the *Vrhad-yoni-tantra, *also equates the yoni with sacred *tirthas *\("crossings," or holy places\), specifically certain holy rivers and ponds.50 The text also says that worship of the yoni earns one the merit ordinarily obtained by making arduous pilgrimages to holy places, because the yoni itself contains all their sacred power.51

Another common ritual in which females are revered is *kumdri **pujd.52 *In this ritual, prepubescent or virgin girls are offered *pujd *and fed. In this case, females from high castes, usually Brahmans, are sometimes specified, while other texts say girls from any caste are suitable. This ritual is not specifically tantric or associated with the Mahavidyas, although it occurs in tantric and Mahavidya materials. It is often done today during Durga Puja, the great autumn festival in honor of Durga. The underlying theme of individual females representing the pervasive divine female principle is again clearly expressed through this ritual.





That some of these rituals may not suggest reverence for women at all, but are simply examples of males setting up women as objects of sexual lust, is of course possible. Mainstream Hindu society has roundly criticized such tantric practices as excuses for sexual indulgence. It is clear, however, that these rituals fit a highly sophisticated general philosophy or theology of reality, and it is therefore unfair to suggest that they are undertaken solely for sexual gratification or involve the implicit or explicit abuse of women.

In some tantric traditions, women are said to be transmitters of doctrine, to play the role of teacher or guru. An example is the Pascimamnaya Kaula tradition, which flourished in Kashmir and Nepal. According to the *Manthana-bhairava-tantra *of this school, no distinction whatsoever should be made between the guru and the *yogini *\(female practitioner\).



The secret of all the scripture, the supreme essence of the oral tradition, is on the lips of the yogini. Thus she is venerated as the Supreme Power which bestows bliss \[knowledge\] of the innate nature of things. . . . The yogini is the womb from which the enlightened yogi is born and her mouth, from which issues the tradition, is the sacred matrix *\(yoni\). *... As the womb *\(yoni\) *of creation, it is the Lower Mouth *\(ardhovaktra\) *which is the essence of Kaula doctrine.53



In the Pascimamnaya school, Siva originally revealed the teachings to *theyoginis, *who subsequently handed them down from generation to generation.54 The implication here is that women, at least in this particular tantric tradition, have played an important, even central, role as sources of tantric instruction. According to the *Guptasddhand-tantra, *initiation by a female guru leads to the achievement of all desires and is the initiate's great good fortune.55 The *Prdnatosini, *citing the *Rudraydmala, *discusses the conditions under which a female guru might perform initiation, and also the qualities that such a woman should possess. It is clear, in short, that females were gurus in at least some tantric cults.56

Even though goddesses play a central role in much tantric literature, particularly in Mahavidya texts; even though women are said to be revered generally in some tantric texts and are often worshiped as individuals; and even though in at least one tantric tradition women are said to be the source and transmitters of doctrine, it is not clear to what extent the Mahavidya materials, or even the related tantric materials, express female spirituality. The texts in most cases take a male point of view and seem to be written by males for males. Women are often described as objects of the male subjects, and the *sadhaka *is assumed to be male and his partner female. The rituals are described from his point of view.





Because the texts are preoccupied with goddesses, female imagery, and women, and usually view the female in a positive or affirmative fashion, and because we know that women were sometimes teachers and full participants in tantric *sadhana, *it is possible that the spirituality described in tantric texts reflects women's religious experience as well as men's. Miranda Shaw has argued in the case of Buddhist Tantrism that the "male gaze," and male spirituality generally, might be understood to reflect female experience as well, insofar as women teach, fully participate in rituals with males, and sometimes write tantric texts.57 The same may be the case in Hindu Tantrism,58 and in Mahavidya worship specifically. While men wrote the great majority of tantric texts, it is possible that women wrote some of them, since they were sometimes teachers. It is also possible, as Shaw has argued for Buddhist Tantra, that male spirituality, as reflected in texts written by males, might be informed by female religious experience, especially in cases where both sexes were full participants in tantric rites. Thus far, however, I have been unable to find Hindu tantric texts that explicitly discuss or describe tantric rites from a female point of view. During my research I asked scholars and informants if they knew of any materials on the Mahavidyas, or any Hindu tantric materials, that were written by, for, or about females. No one did.

This does not mean that such texts do not exist. Miranda Shaw's recent work on tantric Buddhism is sobering in this respect, illustrating how female sources have been almost entirely ignored by scholars of Buddhism. It seems unlikely that scholars of Hinduism have been any more assiduous than scholars of Buddhism in seeking female-authored texts or accounts of female spirituality. We can only hope that female-authored Hindu tantric texts will come to light in the near future.





## The Potentially Liberating Nature of Social Antimodels

Finally, the question remains: Why would one wish to identify with, to actually become \(in the logic of Tantra\), a goddess such as Kali, Chinnamasta, Dhumavati, Bhairavl, or Matarigi, each of whom dramatically embodies marginal, polluting, or socially subversive qualities? These goddesses are frightening, dangerous, and loathsome. They often threaten social order. In their strong associations with death, violence, pollution, and despised marginal social roles, they call into question such normative social "goods" as worldly comfort, security, respect, and honor. Seeking to identify with or become one with these goddesses suggests that the *sadhaka *in some fashion finds marginality, social taboos—the forbidden generally—spiritually refreshing or liberating. Wherein lies the potentially liberating power of what we might term social antimodels?

The answer, as I have suggested at several points throughout this book, probably lies in certain Hindu tantric emphases. These goddesses "fit" the logic of certain aspects of Tantra, especially left-handed Tantra, in which a central aim is to stretch one's consciousness beyond the conventional, to break away from approved social norms, roles, and expectations. By subverting, mocking, or rejecting conventional social norms, which seems to be the aim of the ritual of the five forbidden things \(the *panca **tattva *ritual\), the adept seeks to liberate his or her consciousness from the inherited, imposed, and probably inhibiting categories of proper and improper, good and bad, polluted and pure.

A principle aim in left-handed Tantra is to overcome what might be termed hardening of the categories. Living one's life according to rules of purity and pollution and caste and class that dictate how, where, and exactly in what manner every bodily function may be exercised, and which people one may, or may not, interact with socially, can create a sense of imprisonment from which one might long to escape. Perhaps the more marginal, bizarre, "outsider" goddesses among the Mahavidyas facilitate this escape, as social antimodels who can effectively dislocate an individual. By identifying with one of them, the adept may experience expanded or liberated consciousness; by identifying with the forbidden or the marginalized, an adept may acquire a new and refreshing perspective on the cage of respectability and predictability.

The perspective from the cremation ground \(Kali, Tārā, and others\), or the perspective of a polluted, culturally peripheral person of low caste \(Matarigi\) or of an inauspicious, marginalized widow who is shunned as an ill omen \(Dhumavati\), offers tantric adepts a subversive vision of revered social values, cultural norms, and accepted frameworks of meaning. To take on such a perspective, to become one of these goddesses, might very well involve or imply a transformation of identity in which hardened categories are jettisoned and the emotions, mind, and spirit are stretched in exhilarating fashion.




