+++
title = "05 Possession and Its Discourse in the Himalayas"

+++
Oracular possession in the Himalayas is very common. Daniela Berti reports that in Himachal Pradesh nearly all the village temples in Kulu district have mediums who are possessed by the main temple deity.74 The situation appears to be little different elsewhere across the Himalayas, from Ladakh to eastern Nepal. This is equally the case in Tibet, as Per-Arne Berglie notes: “Even more than the local lama … the dpa’ bo [spirit medium, lit. “hero”] acted in the centre of the religious life of the village.”75

Smriti Srinivas demonstrates that possession among the Buddhists of Ladakh is an integrated activity in that its social, linguistic, psychological, and ritual components operate together. Because personhood is a reflection of these variables—it is an interdependence of social relationships, language use, culturally conditioned psychological states, inherited religious ideology and practice, and the vagaries of individual physical and emotional constitution—personal behavior is theoretically unstable, thus constantly in need of cultural sanction and legitimation. Within the Ladakhi cultural system, which includes social, economic, and political arrangements between Buddhists and Muslims, possession is a culturally sanctioned and recognized form of unusual, manifestly unstable, behavior that ironically serves to reverse, albeit temporarily, areas of perceived weakness or imbalance such as social or political oppression, psychological distress, or even physical debility.76 Although possession is understood in Ladakh to originate in weakness, it nevertheless occupies an important mediatory function. It does not fit neatly into either of Lewis’s categories of “central” or “peripheral” possession; rather, it combines elements of both. For example, it resembles peripheral possession in that the majority of mediums are females who are denied access to positions of power through the primary sociopolitical processes. It is central in that it is so much a part of public culture that it upholds the traditional power structures, in spite of its covert manipulation of certain mundane events. It is also central because it involves possession by Tibetan Buddhist deities with strong shamanic elements. Thus, although Lewis’s categories may be helpful in thinking about Ladakhi and other Himalayan possession, they are too categorical to be productive here.

Srinivas’s primary focus in her discussion of possession is a Buddhist monk called Gelong, who also served as a priest in one of the villages in Nubra, the region of Ladakh in which Srinivas conducted her fieldwork. Gelong was possessed by a local lha called Chamshing, a protector deity (dharmapāla) who, through many rebirths, during which he conquered his anger, rose to an exalted state from that of an enemy spirit. Possession occupies a high profile in Ladakh, not least, according to Gelong, because, after the Chinese occupation of Tibet and the subsequent destruction of the temple images in which the deities were embodied, the Tibetan Buddhist deities themselves “fled to Ladakh to seek their residence in people’s bodies.” According to Gelong’s divination, “seventy-five lhas would come to reside in Nubra (at the moment there are twenty-one), exiled from their former homes.”77

Ladakh is unquestionably a remote area, yet a large number of languages are spoken, including colloquial Tibetan, the Ladakhi dialect of Tibetan, Hindi, Urdu, Kashmiri, and local languages, such as Dogri. Although the language of popular religion in this area requires further elucidation, especially in the highly nuanced area of code-switching, the terminology for spirit possession appears to be derived from Tibetan and Indo-Aryan. The general term for a spirit or deity is lha, which may be benevolent or malevolent in nature. The possessed individual is known as a luyar, or vessel for a lha.78 Malevolent possession is caused by lha known as dre or temo, the latter being an evil female spirit. Srinivas identifies four types of ritual practitioners who treat this type of spirit possession: the lama, who “ensures peace and can help a man’s spirit reach heaven”; the onbo, who “removes evil and assists in securing earthly and other benefits”; the lhaba, who “sees the spirit of a man and its imaginings as if in a mirror”; and the larje, who “takes care of the body.”79 Possession is caused by debilitated life-force (la), which sustains the body (lus). In “negative” possession, vitiation or loss of la is conducive to lassitude, physical weariness, emotional distress, and illness.80 These, in turn, lead to a more immediate cause of possession, called mikha in Ladakhi (lit. “mouth” < Skt. mukha). Mikha refers to that which emanates from the mouth, specifically gossip, derogatory or slanderous speech, and idle or useless chatter, which, consistent with Buddhist doctrine, are considered counterproductive to religious or spiritual aims.81 Oracular or “positive” possession, however, is due to weakened la, which leads to a kind of madness characterized by loss of self-control and spiritual crisis. An individual subject to this type of possession undergoes an initiatory life-crisis ritual called lhapchok, in which the newfound status of oracle becomes formally recognized. The oracle, who can inherit its lha from lineages of practicing oracles, including parents and grandparents, now undergoes a period of training including exorcism and sucking out poison, all this while leading an otherwise ordinary life as a farmer or government worker.82

Among the many studies of Nepali possession and shamanism, perhaps the most comprehensive, particularly from the point of view of rescuing the terminology, is András Höfer’s transcription, translation, and lengthy discussions of oral texts of the Tamang shamans of central Nepal, which are sung in both Tamang and Nepali.83 Tamang is a Sino-Tibetan language, and, though it is related to Tibetan, its speakers are resistant to Tibetanization. The shamans (bombo < Tib. bon-po) represent what Höfer calls “accommodated heterodoxy,” a term that reflects the bombo’s rejection of the stigma of heresy, ascribed to them by the lamas of Tibetan Buddhism, who, Höfer believes, assigned to them the designation bombo because of their apparent similarity to the priesthood of the Bön.84 Höfer presents several terms for kinds of ecstatic experiences, many of them symptomatic of possession. A bombo quivers inside the body (sīṇsiṇ-khòlkhol), “something like the sensation you have when urinating,” reports one informant. The bombo experiences a shamanic trembling or quaking (chyèkpa) that indicates he has been “seized by the god” (lajye cuṇba). When this occurs, the deity, usually a goddess (mài, Nepali māi, māiju) or virgin (Nepali kanyā, kumārī), descends onto one’s back or into one’s body (Tamang: gori yùba; Nepali: sir/kum caṛhnu [mounting one’s head/shoulders]; āṅgmā caṛhnu [to mount the back]). Höfer cautions that having a “superhuman agent on one’s back or in one’s body” does not fully correspond to possession. The latter occurs when the bombo becomes a mouthpiece for the deity (vide Srinivas). In this state the deity plays (khelnu [to play]; khelāunu [to make play]) in the body of the bombo. In the state of gori yùba, the bombo attains partial identity with the deity, “an interpenetration, rather than a fusion, of identities. Informants likened this relationship between the bombo and the superhuman to that between husband and wife.”85

An excellent study of the interaction between Tibetan Buddhism and local shamanistic religion in Nepal, in which possession looms large, is Stan Royal Mumford’s Himalayan Dialogue. This volume draws its theoretical inspiration from Mikhail Bakhtin’s model of dialogic interaction, in which the temporal processes of cultural production are located in a relational “betweenness” characterized by elements of earlier layers of discourse becoming sedimented in later ones, even (or especially) in discourses that rivaled and eventually achieved hegemony over these earlier ones.86 This intersubjective model shares conceptual territory with Marriott’s notion of substance-code in that they both highlight a self that is decentered—or perhaps better is multicentered or polyphonous—and is at odds with notions of autonomous selfhood or identity, whether Hindu, Buddhist, or Judeo-Christian. This is helpful to the present study and would be even more so if the Sanskrit texts were more straightforwardly descriptive or if survivals from earlier vernaculars were more numerous.

An example of Mumford’s ethnographic application of Bakhtin’s largely literary use of dialogic interaction87 can be seen in Mumford’s analysis of competing attempts to exorcize suspected evil spirits from a dying twenty-three-year-old girl, possessed, according to the villagers, by an old woman identified as a witch, who transferred the spirits to the girl through a glass of milk.88 The local Tibetan lama was called in first, to perform an exorcism called “the evil spirit ransom” (’dre glud), in which a chant “calls down weapons like hailstones which will reduce the black sorcerer to dust.” After this failed, the government health assistant was summoned and proceeded to pronounce the girl beyond recovery. The last resort was the local paju shaman, a specialist in exorcisms, whose mantras and heavy-handed actions, including beating the victim about the head with a burning broom and a belated attempt at “red offering” or animal sacrifice, also failed. Indeed, so little confidence did the lama have in the paju’s ritual that he broke into it, whispering sections of the Tibetan Book of the Dead into the dying girl’s ear.89

Mumford comments that both lama and paju agree that “when established human rules are violated, the breach of social harmony brings demonic attack” (a view with strong resonances throughout South Asia).90 In spite of this agreement, the paju takes a dim view of the lama’s attempts to distance himself from personal responsibility in the violence of exorcism by calling in intermediate spirits for this work, as well as his feeble attempt to liberate the spirit. “I only try to kill the demons, there is no thought of liberating them,” says the paju.91 Mumford fruitfully employs Bakhtin’s notions of dialogic interaction to unpack the dialectics and historicity of ethical comportment, ritual (especially exorcistic) practice, and models of hierarchy, retribution, death, and transmutation. No reportage of such immediacy appears in Sanskrit literature, but the lesson is apposite: We must listen for traces of one community’s speech, discourse, and doctrine embedded in those of another. In this way, it may be possible to expose cracks in the surface and break through the canonizing agendas of much of Sanskritic thought.

Berglie has observed possession among Tibetan spirit mediums (dpa’-bo) in Nepal.92 His informants all explained their possession in characteristic Tibetan Buddhist idioms. First the “consciousness” (rnam shes) was sent away, meaning that the mind was emptied. It is important that the medium’s body be completely empty of his or her rnam shes; to be “half god, half man” was an untrustworthy state. This rnam shes was then placed under the care of Padmasambhava (Tib. Padma ’byung gnas) or a protective deity called mkha’ ‘gro Ye shes mtsho rgyal,93 while any one of a number of other deities protected and controlled the proceedings. The possessing deities then enter the body of the dpa’-bo through one of the main channels (Tib. rtsa, Skt. nāḍī) of the subtle body, though the informants differed as to whether the deities themselves entered their body or merely the deity’s rnam shes. During the ritual, mirrors are placed on a nearby altar, because it is in these that the deities are thought to reside during the séance (recall Srinivas’s observation that the ritual specialist called lhaba sees a person’s spirit “as if in a mirror”).94 Two experiences of Berglie’s informants are as follows.

When all the gods summoned have arrived, possession took place by the god most suited to carry out the task of the evening. dBang phyug [one of the informants] said that he then saw all the colours of the rainbow in the mirrors and that all became very bright when the gods arrived. When the god was to take possession of him, his body felt enlarged and as if filled with air. Sri gcod [another informant] said that when his rnam shes was going to leave his body, he saw a glowing fire of many colours. This fire grew bigger and bigger and finally entered his body, as it were. After that, everything became black and he remembered nothing further. At the end of the possession all this happened in the reversed order.95

Berglie records very little of the terminology of possession, though he does record ’bab pa (coming down), which he says is a Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit āveśa.96 This apparent paucity of terminology is not reflective of the actual situation in either literary or colloquial Tibetan. As discussed below, the process of possession found there is remarkably resonant with what is found in texts on classical yoga.

Another noteworthy study, albeit somewhat undisciplined from the perspective of contemporary anthropological discourse, is Angela Dietrich’s Tantric Healing in the Kathmandu Valley.97 This valuable resource extensively records the contemporary vocabulary of healing and spirit beings (unfortunately without diacritics), as well as attitudes about these spirit beings by both healers and clients alike. Dietrich vividly portrays possession as one of the primary modes of both disease production and healing and notes the ubiquity of oracular possession. Indeed, as reported by others, the spirit world is portrayed as alive and well in the Kathmandu Valley.98
