+++
title = "09 Assam and Possession at Kamakhya"

+++
In view of its proximity to Bengal, Nepal, Tibet, and the rest of northeastern India, the presence of a large (and largely unexplored) indigenous Tantric literature, and a predominance of worshippers of exotic goddesses, Assam might be expected to evince a substantial amount of possession. I have no doubt that this is the case. However, this has been almost entirely unresearched. What little is documented, however, is intriguing and requires a brief explanation that contextualizes this absence in terms of the political and religious exigencies of colonial (or colonized) Assam.

Above I cited Ziegenbalg’s early eighteenth-century attitude toward the “heathens” of Malabar and the festival participants in possession there whom he labeled “devil dancers.” Furthermore, we saw the continuity (or reappearance) of Ziegenbalg’s attitudes nearly three centuries later in a few instances of postcolonial Protestant Orientalism. In the present instance we are able to see conflicting attitudes among the British toward festival possession in Assam. Two studies of Naga “tribes” were carried out from 1912 to 1920 by J. H. Hutton, a young Oxford-educated ethnographer and civil servant. He wrote two volumes on the Nagas that are by now in serious need of revision.173 In the foreword to one of them, Henry Balfour, at the time the director of the Pitt Rivers Museum at Oxford, wrote:

It is of the utmost importance not only to the Science of Man, but also to responsible officialdom, since a just and enlightened administration of native affairs cannot be established and pursued without an intimate knowledge of and sympathetic interest in the natives themselves, their customs and their point of view. Lack of ethnographic knowledge has been responsible for many of the misunderstandings and fatal errors which have tarnished our well-meant endeavours to control wisely and equitably the affairs of those whose culture has evolved under environments which differ widely from those of civilised peoples.174

This attitude was widespread among British administrators. Although Balfour was no doubt right that “knowledge of and sympathetic interest in the natives themselves” strengthened the colonialist enterprise of subjugation, it is also true that we would have much less information than is available to us today on topics like the prevalence of deity and spirit possession in India had it not been for the dedicated work of the British administrators who oversaw the production of local and district gazetteers, volumes from which I and many others continue to draw valuable material.

Hutton, one of these eager and highly educated administrators, reported a number of “supernaturals,” including the Sema aghau, equivalent to the Angami ropfu, “a personal familiar … perhaps it may be said that all persons are potentially possessed of aghau, though the existence of the aghau is not always important.”175 These may also be “house spirits,” thus testifying to their capacity to enter individual spaces. Study of spirits and possession was by no means Hutton’s forte, and he includes no vocabulary of possession. He was, however, a step ahead of most of his predecessors in remarking:

The missionaries in their blindness teach the Angani convert to regard all terhoma [deities] as evil, and mission-taught Nagas are in the habit of translating the generic terhoma into English or Assamese as “satas” [viz. Satans]. All of these “satrans,” as they call them, are, however, very far from having those qualities which we traditionally associate with the Devil, and the qualities of some of them are definitely benevolent.176

In spite of the efforts of the British colonial government, indigenous beliefs and religious festivals continue unabated in the twenty-first century. Because of Assam’s proximity to Bangladesh and the unstable political situation in India’s far northeast, it was almost entirely off-limits to Western scholars until recently, and local scholars did not appear to take much interest in the dramatics of oracular possession there.

However, one local chapbook, which describes festival possession at Kamakhya, the great temple complex near Gauhati, was produced in February 2004, with sections in Hindi, English, Assamese, and Bengali.177 This chapbook describes in detail a festival or “ritualistic dance” called Debaddhani or Deodhani, a local term derived from the Sanskrit devadhvani (sound or echo of the deity).178 This yearly festival is held late in the rainy season, beginning on the last day of the month of Śrãvana and continuing for three days, up to the second day of the month of Bhādrapada, coinciding with the annual worship of the Goddess Manasā, a popular snake deity of Kamakhya. The chapbook states that the term debaddhani “conveys the idea of the conceptual dances of the human vehicles chosen and possessed by the divinities to reveal their own intricate selves.” From nine to fifteen people, called deodhā, experience this possession.179 They are generally the same people every year and appear invariably to be men. Like many other sites of divinity in India—and we must view these possessed individuals as sites of divinity—the starting point is explained through a miracle. Once, it is said, a mahārāja with no offspring promised to offer his own head in sacrifice to the goddess if she would grant him a son. Pleased with his prayers, the goddess did so. But the mahārāja, in his joy, forgot about his promise. The goddess became enraged and in a vision reminded the king of his promise. The mahārāja promptly prepared a golden knife and chopped off his own head and offered it to Bhairavī The king thus attained divinity and possessed a local male devotee, thus beginning the debaddhani tradition.

As sites of divinity, the possessed individuals are viewed as loci of purification and, in an initiation ceremony conducted by the principal priest (daloī) of the Manasā temple, accept ritual paraphernalia, vow to eat a simple vegetarian diet (though they may smoke and drink tea), and are paid only in offerings of sacrificed goats, pigeons, and ducks, as well as gifts of ornaments, sweets, and fruit. Much of this is reminiscent of the Vedic initiation performed at the beginning of a soma sacrifice, though it is extremely doubtful that the influence was direct. After several rounds of dancing in the early afternoon, the performers are made up and dressed with garlands, bouquets, ritual insignia, cloth, swords, and other items reminiscent of the possessing deity. The chapbook does not list the names of all the possessing deities, but among them are the deified mahārāja; Mahādeva (Śiva), the ceremonial leader of the group; Kuvera, “the traditional store-keeper” of Mahādeva; and the goddesses Kāḷi, Kāmākhyā, and Calantā. The possessing deities bestow bīja and other meditation (dhyāna) mantras on the possessed, as well as visionary and oracular abilities. According to the chapbook, the signs of possession are “peculiar” or “abnormal” behavior, including fasting and unusually clean living.

[B]ut he demands raw flesh of black pigeons or of a he-goat and he takes these uncooked; he drinks the fresh blood of animals. His eyes turn bloodred, he yawns frequently and roams about aimlessly solely at the mercy and direction of the deity of possession.180 … The dance of the Deodhas consists of very vigorous movements interspersed with shrill shrieks. They run like mad men, as if they are unconscious of the physical environment and the thick crowd of spectators. They hold swords, batons, and animal offerings on their hands and shoulders.

The most dramatic moment occurs when the most deeply possessed among the deodhās, usually those possessed by Kāḷi and Calantā, dance with bare feet on the blade of a long razor sharp blade held by other deodhās. “It is indeed miraculous that none of the Deodhas have ever been hurt.” After the dancing is concluded, the deodhas sit, surrounding the vehicle of Mahādeva, and consume fresh blood and raw meat, in addition to juice of fresh coconuts and other refreshments. The description ends by noting that the deodhas form neither “a caste [n]or a privileged class; nor are they associated with the temple of Kamakhya according to the traditional categories of the temple’s functionaries.” They are, rather, self-selected as a result of inspiration from the particular deity.

The deodhas then, as sites of divinity, represent the Assamese version of what Shulman identifies as localized divinity: The deodhas manifest the immanence and transportability of divinity. This multilocality of divinity, from Śiva to Kālā to Calantā, is, as in Tamilnadu, a localization and transportation of the deity’s śakti, analogous to the Tamil aṇaṅku. In the Assamese case, however, the śakti is not so easily generalized. It is, rather, embodiment itself with the specifications of the individual divinity, including dress, ornamentation, diet, speech, spatial requirements, its position within the matrix of deities who have a special relationship with Mahādeva, the divinity of the center, and the peculiar way that it manifests power and danger.
