+++
title = "02 THE ŚĀKTA PĪṬHAS"

+++

The myth and cult of the Śākta *pīṭhas* is another vivid expression of the Hindu intuition that the Indian subcontinent itself is a goddess. India is covered with sacred places associated with prominent geographical features of the country. Mountains, hills, rivers, caves, and other sites having some geographical or natural peculiarity are often affirmed to possess sacred power or to be places where one may make contact with the divine. These sites are usually called *tīrthas*, a term that means a place where one fords a river. The term is significant in regard to sacred places in two senses: \(1\) it indicates that rivers themselves are often the site of sacred power, and \(2\) such places are sites where one may cross over from the realm of the profane to the sacred, from the human to the divine, from this world to another world.22 In many cases these sites are associated with deities who are well known in the Hindu tradition and who have an elaborate mythology and cult independent of the sacred site in question. In other cases it seems that the object of sacrality, that which lends the site power, is the place itself and not so much the deity who is associated with the place.23

While it is difficult to establish historically how a given site has become popular as a sacred place, it seems clear that in many cases an awe or reverence for the geographical place itself was crucial in distinguishing it.24 Arduous pilgrimages to remote sites where the central religious rite is to bathe in the waters of a pool or river, enter a cave, or have a view of some geographical feature indicate that the great attraction of many sacred places is tied to the geography of the place. Although temples are often found in such places, the environment rather than the temple itself is usually the object of the pilgrim. The temple simply serves to mark, specify, or objectify the sacrality of the local geography. The temple does not enhance the sacrality of the place so much as the place enhances the sacrality of the temple.

Underlying the extraordinary number of sacred sites associated with geographical places in India seems to be the intuition that the land, the earth, or the Indian subcontinent itself is an immense source or repository of sacred power. Looking at a map of the Indian subcontinent on which only the most famous sacred places are marked, we see that India bubbles with sacrality in every region.25 To a great extent these many *tīrthas*, which are associated with Hindu mythology and epic history, have given India its sense of cultural and historical unity. India has rarely been under central rule. For the most part she has been ruled by several competing kingdoms. The sacrality of the land itself, rather than a unified political tradition, has cultivated among most Hindus the strong sense of Mother India.



The whole of India’s sacred geography, with its many *tīrthas*—those inherent in its natural landscape and those sanctified by the deeds of gods and the footsteps of heroes—is a living geography. As such it has been central for the shaping of an Indian sense of regional and national unity. The recognition of India as sacred landscape, woven together north and south, east and west, by the paths of pilgrims, has created a powerful sense of India as Bhārat Mātā—Mother India.26

Many sacred sites are specifically associated with, identified with, or presided over by a goddess. The pervasiveness of sites sacred to goddesses is suggested by the number of towns and villages that have names associated with different goddesses.



. . . in this vast country, holy resorts of the goddess are innumerable and the popularity of her cult is proved even in the place-names of India. Referring to the Panjab region Prof. Niharranjan Ray observed: “Very few people pause to consider this social phenomenon, or to consider the significance of such toponyms in these regions as, for instance, Ambala which is derived from Amba, one of the many names of Durgā, Chandigarh which is named after Caṇdī, . . . Kalka which is a vulgarisation of Kālika, Simla which is śyāmalā Devī in its anglicised version. A careful and close look at the postal directories of the Punjab, Hariyana and Himachal would yield a long list of such toponyms from which one may draw one’s own conclusion. Besides, throughout these regions one still finds a countless number of small, lowly shrines with all but shapeless or crude forms placed on their altars, which worshippers, lowly village folks, describe as Manasā, Caṇḍī, Kālī, Naynā, Durgā, etc.”27

Many of these sites associated with goddesses are called *pīṭhas*, “seats.” Why the term *pīṭha* is used for those sites in preference to the more traditional and common term *tīrtha* is not entirely clear. *Pīṭha* is preferred, perhaps because it tends to emphasize the rootedness of the goddesses associated with these places. Many of the goddesses are preeminently tied to the locales in which they are worshiped. They are perceived to be not so much transcendent, heavenly beings as beings whose power is firmly grounded in the earth itself. It may be, too, that the term *pīṭha* is appropriate to those aspects of Devī theology which emphasize her association with the earth itself and her motherly nature, which casts her in the role of an ever-present, nurturing presence. Perhaps the point of the term is to emphasize that the Devī is to be understood as firmly located in this world, both in the sense of being identified with it and in the sense of being oriented toward such worldly concerns of her devotees as fertility, well-being, and long life.28 While the term *tīrtha* has connotations of crossing from this world to another world, the term *pīṭha* connotes a fixed point, and by extension the fixedness of the goddesses worshiped at these sites.

Sometime in the medieval period an attempt was made to affirm the basic unity of all *pīṭhas* sacred to goddesses.29 The assumption behind this attempt was that the Mahādevī underlies all the particular manifestations of goddesses residing at the many *pīṭhas*. Mythologically this idea was expressed by adding an episode to the myth of Satī’s self-destruction at Dakṣa’s sacrifice. In the expanded version of the myth Śiva arrives at Dakṣa’s sacrifice having received the news that Satī has killed herself. He picks up her body and, racked with grief, begins to wander the cosmos. He is so distraught by Satī’s death and so grieved by the presence of her corpse that he completely ignores his divine responsibilities. His sobbing and grief threaten the stability of the world. Viṣṇu is called upon to remedy the situation. He enters Satī’s body by yoga or else slices pieces of her body off bit by bit, but in one way or another he disposes of her body a bit at a time.30 When Śiva discovers that Satī’s body is gone, he recovers his divine composure and stops grieving. Where the parts of Satī’s body fell, sacred places called *pīṭhas* were then established. The number of *pīṭhas* varies from 4 to 110 in the different accounts of the tale.31

In most accounts of this myth and in most lists of the *pīṭhas*, Satī’s yoni is said to have fallen and been enshrined at Kāmagiri in the region of Kāmarūpa in Assam, where the goddess is worshiped as Kāmākhyā. Although goddess worship is undoubtedly ancient in this part of India32 and although Kāmarūpa is mentioned in the Allahabad pillar inscription of Samudragupta \(middle of the fourth century\), the present temple of Kāmākhyā near Gauhati does not date beyond the sixteenth century. In the seventeenth century the Ahom kings of Assam encouraged the worship of Kāmākhyā on a grand scale, and her centrality in the *pīṭha* mythology probably originates around this time. In the Kāmākhyā temple at Kāmagiri, the central image of the goddess is a yoni carved in stone and smeared with red paste symbolizing blood.33 Rituals are done at the temple each month to signify the Devī’s menstruation. This famous center of goddess worship, in short, reveres and enshrines a sacred place that is affirmed to be the creative orifice of a goddess whose larger body is the earth itself or at least the local mountain and region.

According to this myth, then, the Indian subcontinent has been sacralized by the remains of Satī. India is in effect her burial ground.34 The subcontinent is sown with the pieces of Satī’s body, which make the land especially sacred.35 The myth also stresses that the numerous and varied *pīṭhas* and goddesses worshiped at them are part of a larger, unified whole. Each *pīṭha* represents a part of Satī’s body or one of her ornaments;36 taken together, the *pīṭhas* found throughout India constitute or point toward a transcendent \(or, perhaps better, a universally immanent\) goddess whose being encompasses, underlies, and unifies the Indian subcontinent as a whole. In short, the Indian subcontinent is the goddess Satī.

Although the myth speaks of the dismemberment of Satī’s corpse, the emphasis at the *pīṭhas* is not on the worship of Satī’s relics but on the worship of living goddesses, who are all understood as manifestations of the living Mahādevī. The point is not so much that India is the reliquary of the Devī’s corpse as it is that India is the Devī’s living body. The myth provides a vantage point from which the many local and regional goddess cults throughout India may be understood as part of a larger, unified vision in which each act of devotion to a local goddess becomes an act of reverence to the divinity of India as a whole.
