+++
title = "03 THE GANGES AND THE SACRALITY OF RIVERS"

+++

Geographical sacrality in the Hindu tradition is also dramatically expressed in the reverence shown to almost every river of the Indian subcontinent. This reverence extends all the way back to the *Ṛg-veda*, where the idea is expressed that earthly rivers have their origin in heaven. In the *Ṛg-veda* the Sarasvatī River is praised as a mighty goddess who blesses her devotees with health, long life, and poetic inspiration.37 The earthly Sarasvatī River is said to be only a partial manifestation of the goddess Sarasvatī, for she is said to exist in heaven as well as on earth. The earthly river is an extension or continuation of divine waters that flow from heaven to earth. In Ṛg-vedic cosmology the creation of the world or the process of making the world habitable is associated with the freeing of the heavenly waters by Indra. Indra’s enemy Vṛtra is said to have withheld these waters, thus inhibiting creation. When Indra defeats Vṛtra the waters rush onto the earth like mother cows eager to suckle their young \(10.9\). The rivers of the earth are therefore seen as being necessary to creation and as having a heavenly origin. They are brought to earth by the heroic act of a god who defeats a demon who has hoarded the waters and kept them from fertilizing and nourishing the earth in the form of rivers.38

Reverence for rivers in the Hindu tradition is nowhere more intense than in the case of the Ganges. Like the Sarasvatī River in the Vedic tradition, the Ganges is said to have its origin in heaven. Many myths concerning the descent of the Ganges to earth emphasize this point. The oldest and probably best known concerns the restoration of the sixty thousand sons of King Sagara. According to this myth, Sagara’s sons were dull-witted and impetuous, and while searching the world for their father’s sacrificial horse they insulted and disturbed the tranquillity of the great sage Kapila. In anger, Kapila burned them all to ashes with the fire that he had generated as the result of his great austerities. Sagara’s descendants, despite their piety and ascetic efforts, were unable to restore their incinerated forefathers until the saintly and mighty Bhagīratha, the great-great-great-grandson of Sagara, undertook the task. Giving his kingdom over to a trusted minister, Bhagīratha went to the Himalayas to do heroic austerities. After he had physically mortified himself for centuries, the Ganges appeared in bodily form and granted his wish: she would descend to the earth, provided that someone could be found to break her mighty fall, which otherwise would destroy the earth itself. Śiva was persuaded to receive the Ganges on his head, and so the great heavenly river descended to earth, her mighty fall softened by Śiva’s massive tangle of hair. In his hair she became divided into many streams, each of which flowed to a different region of earth and sanctified that area. Her principal artery emerged from Śiva’s hair and came to India, and under Bhagīratha’s guidance it cut a channel to where the ashes of Sagara’s sons were piled. Moistened by her waters, the souls of the sixty thousand sons were purified and freed to undertake their journey to the land of their fathers, where they could be duly honored by their descendants.39

Other accounts of the Ganges’ descent feature Viṣṇu and sometimes Kṛṣṇa. After assuming his dwarf *avatāra* to trick the demon Bali, Viṣṇu strides across the cosmos to appropriate it for the gods. On his third stride his foot strikes the vault of heaven and breaks it. The Ganges River pours through the hole and eventually finds its way to earth. Falling on Mount Meru, the cosmic axis, the Ganges divides into four parts, and as it flows onto the four world continents it purifies the world in every direction.40 In some versions of the myth the god Brahmā, who is said to hold the heavenly Ganges in his water pot, pours the Ganges on Viṣṇu’s foot when it stretches into the heavenly sphere.41 In still other versions of the myth Viṣṇu becomes liquified when he hears a particularly sublime song sung in his praise, and in this form he enters Brahmā’s water pot, which contains the Ganges, and thus sacralizes her.42

In one way or another, these myths about the Ganges’ coming to earth stress the river’s heavenly origin, her essentially divine nature, and her association with the great male deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Śiva. Spilling out of heaven from Viṣṇu’s foot, containing Viṣṇu’s liquified essence according to some myths, and falling onto Śiva’s head, where she meanders through his tangled locks, the mighty Ganges appears in this world after having been made more sacred by direct contact with Viṣṇu and Śiva. The river then spreads the divine potency of these gods into the world when she flows onto the earthly plane. She gives their sacred presences to the earth in liquid form.43 The myths make clear that the earthly Ganges is only a limited part of the cosmic river that flows in heaven and descends to other regions and worlds as well as this one. As mighty as the Ganges appears here, the earthly river is only a limited aspect of a reality that transcends this world. The Ganges, these myths insists, points beyond itself to a transcendent, cosmic dimension that locates the source of the river in a divine sphere.

Another important theme in the reverence for rivers in Hinduism is the purifying quality of rivers and of running water in general. The purity-conscious Hindu social system, in which pollution is inevitably accumulated in the course of a normal day, prescribes a ritual bath as the simplest way to rid oneself of impurities. This act consists of little more than pouring a handful of cold water over one’s head and letting it run down one’s body. Moving, flowing, or falling water is believed to have great cleansing power; a mere sprinkling of water over one’s head or a dip in a stream is sufficient to remove most kinds of daily pollution accumulated through normal human intercourse with those in a state less pure that one’s own.44 Like fire, the other great natural purifying element in Hinduism,45 water is affirmed to contain intrinsic powers of purification, particularly when in motion.

The most awesome manifestations of moving water in the Hindu context are the great rivers of the Indian subcontinent. Ever moving, ever the same, apparently inexhaustible, such rivers as the Jumna, Cauvery, Narmada, Brahmaputra, and Ganges are revered in particular for their great purifying powers. The myths concerning the heavenly origin of such rivers as the Ganges make the point that the mighty rivers of India are in essence uncontaminated by the impurities of the world, that they arise and for the most part flow in celestial realms before falling to earth. Once descended to earth, however, these same rivers literally wash away the accumulated impurities of the realms they traverse. As a handful of water sprinkled over a person’s head cleanses that person, so the river cleanses the entire world when she falls on Mount Meru. The Ganges, Jumna, Cauvery, and countless other rivers and streams are understood to perform a continuous, gracious process of purifying the earth and her inhabitants.



The goddess Gaṅgā. Sena, twelfth century A.D., Bengal. C. sivaramamurti, *Gaṅgā* \(New Delhi: Orient Longman, 1976\), fig. 29, p. 62.

The physical evidence of this continuous process of purification is the clarity of a river’s swiftly flowing source compared to its broad, sluggish, murky mouth before it enters the sea. A river may take on an increasingly impure appearance the farther it travels from its source. Rivers like the Ganges are nevertheless held to be equally purifying from source to mouth. While the source of the Ganges and the place where it breaks out of the mountains onto the plains are important pilgrimage sites, the lower Ganges also has many places of great sanctity. Banaras itself, perhaps the most sacred site in all of India, is far downstream on the Ganges. Though great removers of pollution, the rivers remain uncontaminated by what they remove, staying ever pure, ever potent, ever gracious to all those who come to them for purification.

Although all rivers are revered as removers of pollution, the Ganges is preeminent among India’s rivers as a purifying power. Hymns extolling the Ganges repeatedly emphasize the miraculously purifying powers of her waters. The *Agni-purāṇa* says that the river makes those regions she flows through into sacred ground, that bathing in her waters is an experience similar to being in heaven, that those afflicted with blindness and other ailments become like gods after bathing in her waters, that the Ganges has made pure thousands of impure people who have seen, touched, or drunk her waters.46 To die while being immersed in the Ganges results in *mokṣa*, final spiritual liberation. Being brushed by a breeze containing even a drop of Ganges water erases all sins accumulated over lifetimes.47 In the *Bṛhaddharma-purāṇa* a sinful king is said to have been spared an untimely death because he lived for a while with a merchant who used to bathe in the Ganges.48 The *Mahābhāgavata-purāṇa* tells the story of a robber who, though sent to hell after death, was subsequently sent to Śiva’s heaven because his flesh was eaten by a jackal who had drunk Ganges water \(74\).

In the Gupta and early medieval periods it was common for the personified images of the Ganges and Jumna to flank the doorways of temples.49 The Ganges’ role as threshold figure in these periods probably had to do with both her \(and the Jumna’s\) purificatory powers. The Ganges’ heavenly origin and descent to the earth made her an intermediary between the earthly and heavenly realms. She is a continuous, liquid link between the two worlds. Her location at the thresholds of temples was appropriate in that she connected and formed a transition between the worlds of men and gods. Her position at the doorways of temples probably also indicated her role as remover of pollution. Before entering the sacred realm of the gods, which a temple represents, devotees should cleanse themselves of worldly impurities. Crossing the threshold of a temple flanked by images of the goddesses Gaṅgā and Yamunā, devotees probably were symbolically cleansed in the purificatory waters of these rivers.

The Ganges’ location as a threshold figure in medieval temples also suggests the threshold function of the physical Ganges River \(and other rivers\). The most common name for a sacred place in Hinduism is *tīrtha*, which means a place for crossing over from one place to another, especially a place for crossing a river, a fording place. As applied to sacred places the term signifies a place at which one may cross from one plane of reality to another, in particular, a place where one can cross from the earthly plane to the divine plane, or from the limited human sphere to the unconditioned divine sphere. As a sacred place, as a *tīrtha*, the Ganges is prototypical. Her waters are affirmed to orginate in heaven and to flow in a continuous stream into the earthly sphere. The Ganges is often called she who flows in the three worlds \(Triloka-patha-gaminī\).50 She is a liquid *axis mundi*, a pathway connecting all spheres of reality, a presence at which or in which one may cross over to another sphere of the cosmos, ascend to heavenly worlds, or transcend human limitations. As Diana Eck has so nicely put it: “It is because the Gaṅgā descended in her *avataraṇa* that she is a place of ascent as a *tīrtha*.”51 Flowing out into the world, the Ganges moves according to rhythms and currents that originate in heaven. Her waters have had physical contact with the great gods Viṣṇu and Śiva. She is a sacred bridge to those realms from which she has come.

The Ganges’ role as a mediator between this world and the divine worlds, as a place at which or in which crossings may be made, is clear in the context of death rituals.52 A strong and widespread Hindu belief is that to die in the Ganges, or to have a few drops of Ganges water poured on one’s lips just prior to death, is to gain immediate liberation.53 Although any part of the Ganges is believed to have this redemptive power, the cult of seeking to die in contact with the Ganges is most active in Banaras, where special hostels for the dying accommodate the thousands of pious Hindus who make a final pilgrimage from all over India to die on the banks of the Ganges there.54 The Ganges is understood to be a particularly accessible bridge from one mode of being to the other, a sure crossing point in the difficult transition from life to death or from bondage to liberation.

Another strong and widespread belief in India is that having their ashes or bones thrown into the Ganges guarantees the dead a safe journey to the realm of the ancestors. Against this background the story of the redemption of Sagara’s sons makes sense. Cursed to eternal banishment from the realm of the ancestors, the souls of Sagara’s sons can only reach the goal of the dead by means of contact with the Ganges, which provides them a special route to heaven. In this role the Ganges is known especially by the epithet Svārga-sopana-saranī \(she who is a flowing staircase to heaven\).55 Pious Hindus make a pilgrimage to various points on the banks of the Ganges to cast the ashes of their ancestors and kin onto the waters of the Ganges so that they, like the sons of Sagara, will be ensured a successful transition to the realm of the dead. Just as the mighty waters of the Ganges are envisioned in Hindu cosmology as continuously descending from heaven to earth, so a continuous procession of souls is ascending the Ganges to transcendent realms.56

The Ganges as the surest access between the worlds of the living and the dead is also seen in *śrāddha* and *tarpaṇa* rituals, which are performed in honor of ancestors. These rites frequently stipulate Ganges water as desirable. The intention of these rites is to nourish the ancestors, the *pitṛs*, in the heavenly sphere. The use of Ganges water may be understood both as nourishing the ancestors directly and as representing the means by which the other offerings to the ancestors will reach the desired realm. The use of Ganges water guarantees the efficacy of the rites by making the Ganges present as a *tīrtha*, a crossing point from the world of the living to the world of the dead.

A particularly strong motif in reverence to the Ganges is her presence to her devotees as a mother. Gaṅgā Mā, “Mother Ganges,” is probably the river’s most popular epithet. Like a mother or as a mother the Ganges is here in the world to comfort her children. She is tangible, approachable, and all-accepting. All who approach her for comfort and blessing are enveloped by her yielding, redemptive waters. She is the distilled essence of compassion in liquid form. No one is denied her blessing. Jagganātha, the author of the *Gaṅgā Laharī*, probably the most famous hymn in praise of the Ganges, was outcast by his fellow Hindus for having a love affair with a Muslim woman. He says that he was even shunned by untouchables and madmen. He declares that he was so despicable, so polluted, that none of the *tīrthas* was able to cleanse him.57 The Ganges alone was willing to accept him and cleanse him, and he in gratitude praises her as a loving mother:



I come to you as a child to his mother.

I come as an orphan to you, moist with love.

I come without refuge to you, giver of sacred rest.

I come a fallen man to you, uplifter of all.

I come undone by disease to you, the perfect physician.

I come, my heart dry with thirst, to you, ocean of sweet wine.

Do with me whatever you will.58

The Ganges’ maternal aspect is seen especially in her nourishing qualities. Her waters are sometimes likened to milk or *amṛta*, the drink of immortality.59 “The concept of the river in India is that of a sustaining mother. The stream of the river carries *payas*. The word *payas* stands for both water and milk. Appropriately this has been used in relation to the river as the stream that sustains the people, her children, with water, as a mother sustains her babies with her milk.”60 Her waters are life-giving, nourishing to all those who bathe in or drink them.61 Her waters have miraculous vivifying powers. The ashes of Sagara’s sons, and the ashes of the dead in general, are enlivened, invigorated, or otherwise made strong enough by the touch of her waters to make the journey to heaven.

As a mother, the Ganges nourishes the land through which it flows, making it fertile. Historically, the land along the banks of the Ganges has been intensely cultivated. It is particularly fertile because of the sediment periodically deposited by the flood waters of the river and because of irrigation. Images of the Ganges often show her carrying a plate of food and a *pūrṇakumbha*, an overflowing pot.62 Mother Ganges is depicted as a being overflowing with food and life-giving waters, as one who continually nourishes all she comes in contact with. As giver of food and as water that makes fields rich with crops, the Ganges bestows her blessings concretely in this world. She makes the earth abundant with crops and thereby sustains and enriches life. As the bestower of worldly blessings the Ganges is particularly approached to ensure healthy crops and to promote fertility in women. “Today in Bihar, at the start of the plowing season, before the seeds are sown, farmers put Ganga water in a pot and set it in a special place in the field to ensure good harvest. Among those who live along the river, a newly married woman unfolds her sari to Ganga and prays for children and the long life of her husband.”63

The waters of the Ganges are also often used to restore the health of sick people.64 The miraculous restorative powers of the Ganges is the subject of many stories. In one of the Buddhist *Jataka* tales we read of a parrot who lived in a fig tree. The tree’s fruit sustained the bird and also provided him shelter. Over the years the parrot became exceedingly devoted to the tree, which had acted as his benefactor throughout his life. Hearing of the devotion of the parrot, the king of the area wished to test the bird’s fidelity and magically dried up the tree. But the bird remained. Impressed with the bird’s loyalty the king granted the parrot a wish. The bird asked that the tree be restored. Thereupon the king “took up the water from the Ganges in his hand and dashed it against the fig-tree stump. Straightaway the tree rose up rich in branch and stem, with honey-sweet fruit, and stood a charming sight, like the bare Jewel-Mountain.”65

The Ganges’ relationship with Śiva suggests a structure similar to the rhythmic interdependence of opposites in Śiva’s relationship with Pārvatī.66 The Ganges, like Pārvatī, her co-wife, represents the cool, nourishing, fertile dimension of reality that calms, contains, or offsets the fierce, hot, destructive powers of Śiva. The most dramatic expression of this relationship is found in the myth concerning the birth of Kārttikeya. When Śiva spills his semen it is so powerfully hot that it cannot be contained even by Agni himself. After passing through a series of containers, none of which is able to contain it for long, the semen falls into the Ganges and is cooled there. Within the cooling womb of Mother Ganges the semen takes on embryonic form, and the war god Kārttikeya is duly born.67

The practice in many Śiva temples of pouring Ganges water on Śiva’s liṅga also suggests the cooling, calming effect of the Ganges. Śiva’s fiery, hot, hard character is complemented and made accessible by the soft, cooling effect the Ganges has on him. The pouring of Ganges water on the liṅga, which goes on continuously from dawn till dusk in some temples,68 is also reminiscent of the Ganges’ descent from heaven onto Śiva’s head. Śiva’s consent to accept the mighty weight of the Ganges to break her fall to earth effectively involves him in worldly matters, drawing him away from isolated meditation. The Ganges’ meandering course through Śiva’s locks and through the regions of the earth physically connects the aloof god’s presence with the earth. By tangibly connecting Śiva with the earth the Ganges extends his presence into the world. In a quite physical and literal way the Ganges acts as Śiva’s *śakti*, permitting his redemptive presence to spread to the world and his devotees, who yearn for his grace. By means of the Ganges Śiva’s otherwise dangerous, destructive, fierce presence is transmitted into an approachable reality accessible to all.69

Behind the many myths that exalt the Ganges as a great goddess and associate her with Śiva, Viṣṇu, Brahmā, and other deities lies an enduring reverence for the river itself. Behind the lofty hymns of praise that affirm the Ganges’ miraculous powers to effect renewed health, fertility, a safe journey to the land of the ancestors, and spiritual liberation, there is a fundamental affection for the physical river that meanders across the North Indian plains. The extent to which it is the physical Ganges River itself that is adored by Hindus is evident in the persistent habit of pilgrims to see, touch, be sprinkled with, and bathe in the river’s waters. It is not anthropomorphic images of the Ganges that attract reverence and worship, although such images are common enough. It is the river itself that is worshiped. Devotees honor other deities by draping a garland around the neck of the image. They worship the Ganges by stringing the garland of flowers across the river itself. Similarly, while it is auspicious to circumambulate the image of a deity, some adventurous devotees circumambulate the Ganges by traveling up one bank and down the other along her entire course.70 In Diana Eck’s phrase, the Ganges is an “organic symbol,” not a narrative symbol. In the case of the Ganges, and in the case of the Hindu reverence for the sacrality of the land, the organic *is* the sacred.



For the Gaṅgā’s significance as a symbol is not exhaustively narrative. First, she is a river that flows with waters of life in a vibrant universe. Narrative myths come and go in history. They may shape the cosmos and convey meaning for many generations, and then they may gradually lose their hold upon the imagination and may finally be forgotten. But the river remains, even when the stories are no longer repeated. The river flows on, bringing life and conveying the living tradition, even to those of this age for whom everything else is demythologized.71

Reverence for and worship of the Ganges is yet another vivid affirmation that the geography of India itself is somehow redemptive, that simply being in contact with this place, dwelling upon it, imbues people with salvific strength.



