+++
title = "05 VĀC"

+++

Although the significance of sound and speech as the primordial stuff of creation is primarily a post-Ṛg-vedic concept, it is apparent even in the *Ṛg-veda* that sound, and especially ritual speech, is powerful, creative, and a mainstay of cosmic-ritual order. The goddess Vāc, whose name means “speech,” reveals herself through speech and is typically characterized by the various attributes and uses of speech. She is speech, and the mysteries and miracles of speech express her peculiar, numinous nature. She is the presence that inspires the *ṛsis* and that makes a person a Brahman \(10.125\). She is truth, and she inspires truth by sustaining Soma, the personification of the exhilarating drink of vision and immortality \(10.125\). She is the mysterious presence that enables one to hear, see, grasp, and then express in words the true nature of things. She is the prompter of and the vehicle of expression for visionary perception, and as such she is intimately associated with the *ṛsis* and the rituals that express or capture the truths of their visions. In an important sense she is an essential part of the religious-poetic visionary experience of the *ṛsis* and of the sacrificial rituals that appropriate those visions.

Perhaps reflecting her role as the bestower of vision, Vāc is called a heavenly queen, the queen of the gods \(8.89\), she who streams with sweetness \(5.73.3\) and bestows vital powers \(3.53.15\). She is described as a courtly, elegant woman, bright and adorned with gold \(1.167.3\). She is, like most other Vedic goddesses, a benign, bounteous being. She not only bestows on people the special riches of language, she is praised in general terms for giving light and strength; one hymn says that she alone provides people with food. She is, then, more than a kind of artificial construct, a personified abstract. She is a pervasive, nourishing deity who stimulates organic growth as well as providing the blessings of language and vision. She is often invoked as a heavenly cow \(4.1.16; 8.89\) that gives sustenance to the gods and men. She is also called mother, as it is she who has given birth to things through naming them. Her benign nature is also celebrated for enabling people to see and recognize friends. Bearing her mark of intelligible, familiar speech, one friend may recognize and commune with another \(10.71\). Thus Vac is a bounteous cow who provides, first, the lofty, discerning vision of the *rsi;* second, the ritual formulas of the priest; and third, the everyday language of people which enables them to establish themselves as a community of friends.

Vāc’s character is richly developed in the *Brāhmaṇas* in a series of myths and images that associate her with creation and ritual. Vāc’s indispensability in ritual and cult \(in which spoken or chanted mantras are essential\) is emphasized in myths that tell of how the gods stole her or seduced her away from the demons after the creation of the world and, having obtained her, instituted sacrificial rituals that sustain the creation and produce bounty, life, and immortality for the gods.5 Without her the divine rituals would not have been possible. In her role as creator, Vāc is said to create the three *Vedas*,6 and the three *Vedas* are in turn equated with the earth \(*Ṛg-veda*\), the air \(*Yajur-veda*\), and the sky \(*Sama-veda*\)7 At another place she is said to have entered into the sap of plants and trees, thus pervading and enlivening all vegetation.8Prajāpati, the central deity in the *Brāhmaṇas,* is described as initiating creation by impregnating himself by comingling his mind and his speech.9 Elsewhere it is said that Vāc, having been created by Prajāpati’s mind, wished to become manifest, to multiply herself, to extend herself, and so it was that creation proceeded, impelled by Vāc’s urge to create.10

Vāc plays a significant role in Vedic literature, not only in terms of being mentioned often but also from a theoretical point of view. Theologically it is suggested that she is coeternal with Prajāpati. Although the *Brāhmaṇas* are not consistent, sometimes stating that Vāc is created by Prajapati, she does seem to have a theologically exalted position in these texts. There are also hints that it is through Vāc, or in pairing with her, that Prajāpati creates. This is different from the role of *Śakti* in later Hindu philosophic schools, in which the male counterpart of *sakti* tends to be inactive. Prajāpati toils and desires the creation. Nevertheless, her role in the *Brāhmaṇas* is suggestive of the nature of *Śakti* in later Hinduism. Her role vis-à-vis Prajāpati is also suggestive of the theory of *śabda-brahman* \(the absolute in the form of sound\) and the *sphoṭa* theory of creation \(in which the world is created through sound\).
