+++
title = "04 TENSION AND RESOLUTION"

+++

The main theme of the Pārvatī cycle of myths is clear. The association between Pārvatī and Śiva represents the perennial tension in Hinduism between the ascetic ideal and the householder ideal. Pārvatī, for the most part, represents the householder. Her mission in almost all renditions of the myth is to lure Śiva into the world of marriage, sex, and children, to tempt him away from asceticism, yoga, and otherworldly preoccupations. In this role Pārvatī is cast as a figure who upholds the order of dharma, who enhances life in the world, who represents the beauty and attraction of worldly, sexual life, who cherishes the house and society rather than the forest, the mountains, or the ascetic life. In this role she repeats the feat of Satī in luring Śiva into an erotic relationship, which this time eventually brings him within the sacrificial, priestly order permanently. Pārvatī civilizes Śiva with her presence; indeed, she domesticates him. Of her role in relation to Śiva in the hymns of Māṇikkavācakar, a ninth-century poet-saint from South India, it has been said: “Śiva, the great unpredictable ‘madman’ \(*pittaṉ, piccaṉ*\), as Māṇikkavācakar occasionally addresses him . . . , is rendered momentarily sane \(i.e., behaves in a socially acceptable manner\) when in the company of the goddess. . . . Contact with his properly cultured spouse seems to connect him with ordinary social reality and temporarily domesticates him.”41

The tension between Pārvatī and Śiva as representatives of the main types of religiosity in Hinduism is stated in various ways in the myths. Śiva is always said to have no family, no lineage, and no interest in progeny, which is one of the central concerns of the order of dharma and the householder’s religion. Pārvatī, on the contrary, is born into an established family and longs for marriage, children, and a home. Śiva is associated with fire, which dries up or burns up the juices of life. His inner fire is so intense that in one myth he is shown to contain ashes in his veins instead of blood.42 In one of the most famous of his myths he burns the god of lust to ashes with the fire from his middle eye. Pārvatī is associated with Soma, the deity or substance associated with the life essence of all plants. In many myths it is she who asks Śiva to revive Kāma, as she realizes that the god of sexual desire is at the root of the householder’s life. In relation to Kāma, then, Śiva is a destructive fire, whereas Pārvatī is a refreshing, liquid glance: “While the fiery glance is Śiva, the Soma glance is Pārvatī, who revives Kāma when Śiva has burnt him.”43 Śiva is often said to wear on his body the ashes of the burnt Kama. Kāma is resuscitated when Śiva embraces Pārvatī and the sweat from her body mingles with the ashes of the burned god.44 Elsewhere it is said that when Kāma was burned by Śiva he entered the limbs of Pārvatī.45 In the most general terms, Śiva as Agni is the fire that destroys the world at the end of each cosmic age. Pārvatī as Soma, in contrast, is the cosmic waters from which the world is inevitably reborn.

Throughout Hindu mythology it is well known that one of Śiva’s principal functions is the destruction of the cosmos. In fact, Śiva has about him a wild, unpredictable, destructive aspect that is often mentioned. As the great cosmic dancer he periodically performs the *tāṇḍava,* an especially violent dance. Wielding a broken battle-ax, he dances so wildly that the cosmos is destroyed completely. In descriptions of this dance Śiva’s whirling arms and flying locks are said to crash into the heavenly bodies, knocking them off course or destroying them utterly. The mountains shake and the oceans heave as the world is destroyed by his violent dancing.46 Pārvatī, in contrast, is portrayed as a patient builder, one who follows Śiva about, trying to soften the violent effects of her husband.47 She is a great force for preservation and reconstruction in the world and as such offsets the violence of Śiva. A seventeenth-century Tamil work pictures Pārvatī as a patient child who creates the worlds in the form of little houses. Śiva is pictured as constantly frustrating her purpose by destroying what she has so carefully built.

The crazy old madman stands in front,

dancing, destroying the beautiful little house that  
you have built in play.

You don’t become angry, but every time \(he destroys  
it\) you build it again.48

When Śiva does his violent *tāṇḍava* dance Pārvatī is described as calming him with soft glances, or she is said to complement his violence with a slow, creative step of her own.49

Pārvatī’s goal in her relationship with Śiva is nothing less than the domestication of the lone, ascetic god whose behavior borders on madness.50 Śiva is indifferent to social propriety, does not care about offspring, declares women to be a hindrance to the spiritual life, and is disdainful of the trappings of the householder’s life.51 Pārvatī tries to involve him in the worldly life of the householder by arguing that he should observe conventions if he loves her and wants her. She persuades him, for example, to marry her according to the proper rituals, to observe custom, instead of simply running off with her.52 She is less successful, however, in getting him to change his attire and ascetic habits. She often complains of his nakedness and finds his ornaments disgraceful.53 Usually prompted by her mother, Pārvatī sometimes complains that she does not have a proper house to live in. Śiva, as is well known, does not have a house but prefers to live in caves, on mountains, or in forests or to wander the world as a homeless beggar. Many myths delight in Śiva’s response to Pārvatī’s domestic pleas for a house. When she complains that the rains will soon come and that she has no house to protect her, Śiva simply takes her to the high mountain peaks above the clouds where it does not rain.54 Elsewhere he describes his “house” as the universe and argues that an ascetic understands the whole world to be his dwelling place.55 These philosophic arguments never satisfy Pārvatī, but she rarely, if ever, wins this argument and gains a house. In the final analysis, despite her success in involving Śiva in marital and family affairs, despite her initiating sexual desire in him, Śiva always remains in part antisocial and ascetic, a god who lives on the fringes of society.

The theme of Pārvatī’s domesticating Śiva, or trying to domesticate him, is also seen in her tempering, or taming, his *tapas* and his sexual vigor, both of which are dangerous in excess. The theme of an ascetic’s great austerities causing such heat that the world itself is scorched is common in Hindu mythology. The solution to this threat to the world is almost always either having a woman seduce the ascetic \(women hardly ever play the role of the ascetic\), granting a boon to the ascetic which distracts him from his asceticism, or granting the boon for which he undertook his asceticism in the first place. Śiva, too, does excessive *tapas* and thus threatens the world,56 and it is Pārvatī’s role to distract him from his asceticism or seduce him into erotic or domestic entanglements. In many myths Pārvatī is not so much Śiva’s complement as his rival, tricking, seducing, or luring him away from ascetic practices.

Śiva’s sexual vigor is also threatening to the world in quantity and intensity, and again it is Pārvatī who subdues, tames, or otherwise controls Śiva’s immense sexual vitality.



The sages cursed Śiva’s *liṅga* to fall to the earth, and it burnt everything before it like a fire. Never still, it went to the underworld and to heaven and everywhere on earth. All creatures were troubled, and the sages went in desperation to Brahmā, who said to them, “As long as the *liṅga* is not still, there will be nothing auspicious in the universe. You must propitiate Devī so that she will take the form of the *yoni*, and then the *liṅga* will become still.” They honoured Śiva, and he appeared and said, “If my *liṅga* is held in the *yoni,* then all will be well. Only Pārvatī can hold the *liṅga,* and then it will become calm.” They propitiated him, and thus liṅga-worship was established.57

Śiva is a god of excesses, both ascetic and sexual, and Pārvatī plays the role of modifier. As a representative of the householder ideal she represents the ideal of controlled sex, namely, married sex, which is opposed to both asceticism and eroticism.

The theme of the conflict, tension, or opposition between the way of the ascetic and the way of the householder in the mythology of Pārvatī and Śiva yields to a vision of reconciliation, interdependence, and symbiotic harmony in a series of images that combine the two deities. Three such images or themes are central to the mythology, iconography, and philosophy of Pārvatī: \(1\) the theme of *Śiva-śakti,* \(2\) the image of Śiva as Ardhanārīśvara \(the Lord who is half woman\), and \(3\) the image of the liṅga and yoni.

The idea that the great male gods all possess an inherent power by which or through which they undertake creative activity is assumed in medieval Hindu mythology. When this power, or *śakti*, is personified it is always in the form of a goddess. Pārvatī, quite naturally, assumes the identity of Śiva’s *sakti* in many myths and in some philosophic systems. In the role of Śiva’s *śakti,* Pārvatī performs functions, or assumes meanings, which imply an underlying harmony or interdependent relationship between herself and Śiva. She is often identified with the force underlying and impelling creation. While Śiva remains more or less aloof in the creation of the world, Pārvatī as *śakti* is active, pervading the creation as its underlying strength and power.58 In this active, creative role she is sometimes identified with *prakṛti* \(nature\), whereas Śiva is identified with *puruṣa* \(pure spirit\).59 As *prakṛti,* Pārvatī represents the inherent tendency of nature to express itself in concrete forms and individual beings. In this task, however, whether as *śakti* or *prakṛti,* it is understood that Pārvatī either must be set in motion by Śiva or must act according to his will, wish, or design. She is not seen as antagonistic to him. Her role as his *śakti* is almost always interpreted as positive. Through Pārvatī, Śiva \(the Absolute\) is able to express himself in the creation. Without her he would remain inert, aloof, inactive. Just as in the mythology Pārvatī is necessary for involving Śiva in creation, so as his *śakti* she is necessary for his self-expression in creation. It is only in association with her that Śiva is able to realize or manifest his full potential. Without Pārvatī Śiva’s great power does not, or cannot, manifest itself in creation. Pārvatī as *śakti* not only complements Śiva, she completes him.

A variety of images and metaphors are used to express the harmonious interdependence and close identity of Pārvatī as *śakti* and Śiva as the *śaktīmān,* the possessor of *śakti.* Śiva is said to be the male principle throughout creation, Pārvatī the female principle;60 Śiva is the sky, Pārvatī the earth;61 Śiva is subject, Pārvatī object;62 Śiva is the ocean, Pārvatī the seashore;63 Śiva is the sun, Pārvatī its light;64 Pārvatī is all tastes and smells, Śiva the enjoyer of all tastes and smells;65 Pārvatī is the embodiment of all individual souls, Śiva the soul itself;66 Pārvatī assumes every form that is worthy to be thought of, Śiva thinks of all such forms;67 Śiva is day, Pārvatī night;68 Pārvatī is creation, Śiva the creator;69 Pārvatī is speech, Śiva meaning;70 and so on. In short, the two are actually one—different aspects of ultimate reality—and as such are complementary, not antagonistic.

The meaning of the Ardhanārīśvara form of Śiva is similar. The image shows a half-male, half-female figure. The right side is Śiva and is adorned with his ornaments; the left side is Pārvatī and adorned with her ornaments.71 In the *śiva-purāṅa* the god Brahmā is unable to continue his task of creation because the creatures that he has produced do not multiply. He propitiates Śiva and requests him to come to his aid. Śiva then appears in his half-male, half-female form. The hermaphrodite form splits into Śiva and Pārvatī, and Pārvatī, at Brahmā’s request, pervades the creation with her female nature, which duly awakens the male aspect of creation into fertile activity.72 Without its female half, or female nature,73 the godhead as Śiva is incomplete and is unable to proceed with creation. To an even greater extent than the *śiva-śakti* idea, the androgynous image of Śiva and Pārvatī emphasizes that the two deities are absolutely necessary to each other, and only in union can they satisfy each other and fulfill themselves. In this form the godhead transcends sexual particularity or, perhaps more accurately, includes both dimensions of sexual particularity. God is both male and female, both father and mother, both aloof and active, both fearsome and gentle, both destructive and constructive, and so on.



Ardhanārīśvara, the Lord as half woman. South Indian bronze, Choja, eleventh century A.D. Government Museum, Madras. Mario Bussagli and Calembus Sivaramamurti, *5000 Years of the Art of India* \(New York: Harry Abrams, 1981\), fig. 314, p. 255. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

The image of the linga in the yoni, which is the most common image of the deity in Śiva temples,74 similarly teaches the lesson that the tension between Śiva and Pārvatī is ultimately resolved in interdependence. Satī and Pārvatī as sexual objects succeed in tempering both Śiva’s excessive detachment from the world and his excessive sexual vigor. In the form of the yoni in particular Satī-Pārvatī fulfills and completes, while at the same time tempering, Śiva’s creative tendencies. As the great yogi who accumulates immense sexual potency he is symbolized by the linga. This great potency is creatively released in sexual or marital contact with Satl-Pārvatī. The ubiquitous image of the liṅga in the yoni symbolizes the creative release in the ultimate erotic act of power stored through asceticism. The erotic act is thus enhanced, made more potent, fecund, and creative, by the stored-up power of Śiva’s asceticism. The liṅga and the yoni symbolize a creative interaction between the world of the ascetic, in which sexual abstinence is mandatory, and the life of the householder, in which sex is necessary.75

While many of the myths of Śiva and Pārvatī seem to accentuate the tension between the two, certain iconographic and philosophic themes concerning the divine pair show a preference for depicting or understanding them as in basic harmony. As a couple they are usually shown as affectionate. The half-male, half-female image also emphasizes the uniting of opposites. The lesson seems to be that the two poles that they represent, dharma and *mokṣa*, should not be isolated from each other. In relationship with Pārvatī, Śiva does not give up asceticism entirely, nor does Pārvatī give up asceticism entirely after having used it as a means of marrying Śiva. Nonetheless, the mutual bliss of Śiva and Pārvatī also seems to teach that asceticism enhances the intensity of sexuality and makes the orderliness of the householder’s world even more attractive. Held together, or in creative tension, yoga and *bhoga* \(worldly or bodily pleasure\), dharma and *mokṣa*, may be seen to complement and complete each other in the divine pair.
