+++
title = "02 ŚRĪ-LAKṢMĪ IN LATER HINDUISM"

+++

In the course of her history Śrī-Lakṣmī has been associated with male deities, each of whom is significant in suggesting characteristics of the goddess. Some texts associate her with the god Soma. Srī-Lakṣmī, along with several other deities, attends Soma after he performs a great royal sacrifice.17 The association of Lakṣmī with Soma is noteworthy for two reasons. First, in attending him after he has assumed the position of royal authority, she demonstrates one of her main characteristics, that of bestowing royal authority or being present where royal authority exists. Second, Soma is well known as the lord of plants and is often identified with the fertile sap that underlies vegetative growth. It is fitting that Śrī-Lakṣmī, who is similarly identified, should be associated with Soma in these texts. They complement and reinforce each other as symbols of the sap of existence.

A few texts say that Lakṣmī is the wife of Dharma. She and several other goddesses, all of whom are personifications of certain auspicious qualities, were given to Dharma in marriage by her father, Dakṣa. This association seems primarily to represent a thinly disguised “wedding” of Dharma \(virtuous conduct\) with Śrī-Lakṣmī \(prosperity and well-being\). The point of the association seems to be to teach that by performing dharma one obtains prosperity.18

A more interesting and fully developed association is between Śrī and the god Indra.19 Several myths relate the theme of Indra’s losing, acquiring, or being restored to the boon of Śrī-Lakṣmī’s presence. In these myths it is clear that what is lost, acquired, or restored in the person of Śrī is royal authority and power. Indra is traditionally known as the king of the gods, the foremost of the gods, and he is typically described as a heavenly king. It is therefore appropriate for Śrī to be associated with him as his wife or consort. In these myths Śrī-Lakṣmī appears as the embodiment of royal authority, as a being whose presence is essential for the effective wielding of royal power and the creation of royal prosperity.

Several myths of this genre describe Śrī-Lakṣmī as being persuaded to leave one ruler for another. She is said, for example, to dwell with the demons Bali and Prahlāda. While she dwells with these demons they are demons in name only. Under her gracious presence they rule their kingdoms righteously, society operates smoothly, the lands are fertile, and the demon kings themselves shimmer with sublime inner and outer qualities. When she leaves Prahlāda, at Indra’s request, the demon loses his luster and fears for his well-being.20 Along with Sri, the following qualities depart from Prahlāda: good conduct, virtuous behavior, truth, activity, and strength. With Śrī’s departure, Prahlāda is left emptied of his royal might and his predilections toward virtuous conduct.



Śrī-Lakṣmī. Pratapaditya Pal, *Indo-Asian Art from the John Gilmore Ford Collection* \(Baltimore: Walters Art Gallery, 1971\), fig. 19. Reprinted by permission of the Walters Art Gallery.

The myths concerning the demon Bali make clear the same association between Lakṣmī and victorious kings. In these myths Bali defeats Indra. Lakṣmī is attracted to Bali’s winning ways and bravery and joins him, along with her attendant auspicious virtues. In association with the auspicious goddess, Bali rules the three worlds with virtue, and under his rule the three worlds prosper.21 Only when Viṣṇu, at the request of the dethroned gods, tricks Bali into surrendering the three worlds does Śrī-Lakṣmī depart from Bali, leaving him lusterless and powerless.

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s presence ensures a king more than ruling power. One of the myths associating her with Indra tells us that when she sat down next to Indra he began to pour down rain and the crops grew abundantly. Cows gave plenty of milk, all beings enjoyed prosperity, and the earth flourished.22 Indra is associated with fertility in Vedic texts, and well into the medieval period festivals celebrated in his honor associated him with the fertility of the crops. From the earliest Vedic texts he is described as wielding the *vajra* \(the thunderbolt\) as his favorite weapon, and to the present day he is associated with bringing rain. As a couple, Śrī-Lakṣmī and Indra are a clear example of a common type of divine pair in the world’s religions: a female earth goddess and a male sky/rain god. Together they combine to generate the fertility that is necessary to all life. In the *Vedas* the deities Dyaus and Pṛthivī are a good example of this type of divine pair and the reciprocal roles they play in generating and sustaining life. Śrī-Lakṣmī in association with Indra seems to represent a later version of the Dyaus-Pṛthivī couple. In this symbiotic relationship the male deity, associated with the sky, is said to fertilize the female deity with his rain. Indra also seems to have had phallic associations in his identification with the plow, and it seems appropriate that he would become associated with a goddess representing the fertile earth.23

Some traditions also associate Śrī-Lakṣmī with the god Kubera. Kubera is lord of the Yakṣas, a race of supernatural beings who in general frequent forests and uncivilized areas, and he is in particular the possessor and distributor of wealth. He is the possessor and guardian of the earth’s treasures in the form of gems. Śrī’s relationship to Kubera is appropriate insofar as each of them is preeminently associated with prosperity and wealth.24 Where wealth and abundance are, one or the other deity, and probably both, is certain to be found. So the two deities become associated as a couple.25 Śrī’s identification through Kubera with the Yaksas, in addition, emphasizes her identity with the mysterious powers of growth and fertility.26 Yaksas often play the part of fertility symbols in Indian art and generally are associated iconographically with trees, vines, and vegetative growth. They are often shown embracing trees, leaning against trees,27 or pouring forth vegetation from their mouths or navels.28 The identification of Śrī-Lakṣmī, the goddess who embodies the potent power of growth, with the Yakṣas is natural. She, like them, involves herself and reveals herself in the irrepressible fecundity of plant life.

Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with so many different male deities and with the notorious fleetingness of good fortune earned her a reputation for fickleness and inconstancy.29 In one text she is said to be so unsteady that even in a picture she moves and that if she associates with Viṣṇu it is only because she is attracted to his many different forms \(*avatāras*\).30 By the late epic period \(ca. A.D. 400\), however, Śrī-Laksmī becomes consistently and almost exclusively associated with Viṣṇu; as his wife she becomes characterized by steadfastness.31 It is as if in Viṣṇu she has finally found the god she was looking for and, having found him, has remained loyal to him ever since.

Mythologically Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu comes about in the context of the churning of the milk ocean by the gods and demons, who seek the elixir of immortality \(*amṛta*\). Lakṣmī does not figure at all in some versions of this story,32 but in others she is the central focus of the myth.33 What seems clear is that a myth concerning the churning of the ocean to obtain various valuable things existed from ancient times in India and that at some point Lakṣmī’s origin was felt to be related to this mythological event. The interesting question is why Lakṣmī’s origin makes sense in the context of this myth and how her association with Viṣṇu comes about in later versions of the myth.

An ancient Indian tradition asserts that creation proceeds from an infinite body of primordial water, that the world or the multitude of universes of later Hinduism ultimately arises from and rests upon this limitless expanse of waters. In its unrefined state this watery world is chaotic, or at least formless and overwhelming. Creation, or ordered existence, only takes place when this watery mass is somehow agitated, processed, or refined in such a way that form and growth take place. Within the watery formlessness resides the potency or essence of life, *rasa, amṛta,* or *soma.* When this potency is released by the primordial waters, creation can proceed.34 The churning of the ocean by the gods and demons is intended to obtain the nectar of immortality, the essence of creative power that will make the churners immortal and grant them their status as ordainers and overseers of creation. The act of churning dramatically illustrates the process of distilling the essence of the primordial waters. By churning milk one thickens and refines it until it yields a richer substance—butter. Similarly, the milk ocean when churned yields valuable essences, among them, in most later versions of the myth, the goddess Śrī-Lakṣmī.

The role or place of Srī-Lakṣmī in this myth of creation seems fairly clear. Although the nectar of immortality is described as a separate entity that arises from the churning of the ocean, Śrī-Lakṣmī has many and obvious associations with the sap of existence that underlies or pervades all plant and animal life. She herself represents the miraculous transformation of the formless waters into organic life.35 The extent to which Śrī-Lakṣmī is necessary to the ongoing created order, and hence may be identified or associated with the essence of the creation, is indicated in some later variants of the myth. These versions tell us that Śrī-Lakṣmī disappears from the three worlds when Indra insults her. As a result, all sacrifices cease to be performed, all austerities are discontinued by the sages, all generosity ends, the sun and moon lose their brilliance, the gods lose their strength, and fire loses its heat.36 In the absence of the goddess the worlds become dull and lusterless and begin to wither away. When she returns, the worlds again regain their vitality, and the society of humans and the order of the gods regain their sense of purpose and duty.

Most variants of the myth say that Śrī-Lakṣmī’s association with Viṣṇu took place at the churning of the ocean. The relationship of Śrī and Viṣṇu seems appropriate in the context of the myth and at a general symbolic level in several ways. During her early history Śrī’s attraction to powerful rulers among the gods \(and demons\) was firmly established. In the churning-of-the-ocean myth Viṣṇu is clearly the dominant god. He oversees the entire operation and actually makes the churning possible by providing two indispensable participants: Vāsuki, the cosmic serpent who is used as the churning rope, and the cosmic tortoise, upon which the churning stick rests. Furthermore, both Vāsuki and the tortoise are actually forms of Viṣṇu himself. When Śrī comes forth from the ocean, she is naturally attracted to Viṣṇu, the god who is obviously superior to the others. Conversely, Viṣṇu, as the divine overseer of the event, is the natural recipient of the treasures that result from the churning. As the master of ceremonies, Viṣṇu is entitled to the lovely goddess who emerges as a result of the efforts of the gods and demons.

Viṣṇu’s royal nature is also significant in Śrī’s association with him. By the medieval period \(fifth through thirteenth century A.D.\) Viṣṇu is considered the divine king par excellence. He is described as dwelling in a heavenly court, Vaikuṇṭha, and he is depicted iconographically as a mighty king. His primary role as king is to institute and maintain dharmic order. This he does by means of his various *avatāras*, who intervene in the world from time to time to combat the forces of disorder. Viṣṇu, however, is also present wherever righteous kings rule and maintain order. He maintains order on the earth, that is, through certain human agents, namely, righteous kings.37 We noted earlier that kings cannot rule without the authority that is bestowed by Śrī. Where she is present, royal authority waxes strong. Where she is absent, would-be rulers become weak and ineffectual. The association of Śrī with Viṣṇu, the supreme divine king, as her husband is therefore fitting. She follows him when he becomes part of his human agents—the righteous kings—and she bestows on these kings her royal power, prosperity, and fertility. In effect Viṣṇu designates his human agents, and Śrī then empowers them, enabling them to be effective maintainers of Viṣṇu’s cosmic scheme.

As Viṣṇu’s wife, Lakṣmī loses her fickle nature. As the great cosmic king’s queen she is depicted as a model Hindu wife, loyal and submissive to her husband. One of her most popular iconographic depictions shows her kneeling before Viṣṇu to massage his feet.38 In her early history Śrī-Lakṣmī was strongly associated with growth and fecundity as manifested in vegetation. A teeming vitality animated her presence, a power that gave birth inexhaustibly to life. In her association with Viṣṇu her character seems more restrained. Although she does not lose her association with fertility and growth, she seems more clearly involved in or revealed in the order of dharma that her husband creates and oversees. When Viṣṇu assumes his various *avatāras* in order to uphold dharma, she incarnates herself as his helpmate, assuming an appropriate form as his spouse or consort. She thus assists and accompanies him in his world-maintaining role. The *Viṣṇu-purāṅa* says:



. . . as Hari descends in the world in various shapes—so does his consort Śrī. Thus when Hari was born as a dwarf, as a son of Aditi, Lakṣmī appeared from a lotus; . . . when he was Rāghava, she was Sītā, and when he was Kṛṣṇa, she became Rukminī. In the other descents of Viṣṇu, she is his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Viṣṇu to put on. \(1.9.142–146\)39

Her role as a model wife typifies her more subdued nature. She is occupied in this role with household order. Indeed, she is said to cook food at the Jagannātha temple for those who come for *prasād.40* In her role as an ideal wife she exemplifies the orderliness of human society and human relations. Iconographic representations of Viṣṇu and Śrī together typically show her as subservient to Viṣṇu, which is in harmony with sexual roles as described in the *Dharma-śāstras.* She is usually shown as considerably smaller than Viṣṇu and as having only two arms instead of the four arms that she usually has when shown alone. Her submissive position is nicely conveyed in an image of the divine pair from Bādāmī in which Viṣṇu sits on a high stool while Lakṣmī sits on the ground and leans on him, her right hand placed on his knee.41

Reflecting her increasing association with social order, several texts locate Lakṣmī’s presence in righteous behavior, orderly conduct, and correct social observance. She is said, for example, to live with those who tell the truth and are generous.42 She dwells with those who have clean bodies and are well dressed,43 who eat with moderation, who have intercourse with their wives on a regular basis \(something prescribed in the Hindu law books\), and who cover themselves when asleep.44 In the *Mahābhīrata* she says: “I dwell in truth, gift, vow, austerity, strength and virtue” \(12.218.12\). Orderly social relations and traditional social virtues attract Śrī-Lakṣmī, herself a model of social decorum as Viṣṇu’s wife.

In association with Viṣṇu, Lakṣmī provides a picture of marital contentment, domestic order, and satisfying cooperation and beneficial interdependence between male and female. Most iconographic representations picture the pair as a smiling, happy couple; they are often shown touching each other intimately. In images of the Lakśmī-Nārāyaṇa type, Lakśmī is usually depicted seated on Viṣṇu’s left thigh. Her right hand is around his neck while his left arm encircles her waist.45 Sometimes the two are shown holding hands,46 and it is not unusual for them to be shown gazing into each other’s eyes.

The intimacy of the two, indeed, their underlying unity, is dramatically shown in images in which they are merged into one bisexual figure, Viṣṇu constituting the right half of the figure and Lakṣmī the left.47 The interdependence of the two is the subject of a long passage in the *Viṣṇu-purāṇa.* There Viṣṇu is said to be speech and Lakṣmī meaning; he is understanding, she is intellect; he is the creator, she is the creation; she is the earth, he the support of the earth; she is a creeping vine, he is the tree to which she clings; he is one with all males, and she is one with all females; he is love, and she is pleasure \(1.8.15 ff.\).48
