+++
title = "01 UṢAS"

+++

In the *Ṛg-veda* the goddess Uṣas is consistently associated with and often identified with the dawn. She reveals herself in the daily coming of light to the world. A young maiden, drawn in a hundred chariots \(1.48\), she brings forth light and is followed by the sun \(Surya\), who urges her onward \(3.61\). She is praised for driving away, or is petitioned to drive away, the oppressive darkness \(7.78; 6.64; 10.172\). She is asked to chase away evil demons, to send them far away \(8.47.13\). As the dawn, she is said to rouse all life, to set all things in motion, and to send people off to do their duties \(1.48, 92\). She sets the curled-up sleepers on their way to offer their sacrifices and thus renders service to the other gods \(1.113\). Usas gives strength and fame \(1.44\). She is that which impels life and is associated with the breath and life of all living creatures \(1.48\). She is associated with or moves with *ṛta,* cosmic, social, and moral order \(3.61; 7.75\). As the regularly recurring dawn she reveals and participates in cosmic order and is the foe of chaotic forces that threaten the world \(1.113.12\).

Uṣas is generally an auspicious goddess associated with light \(6.64\) and wealth. She is often likened to a cow. In *Ṛg-veda* 1.92 she is called the mother of cows and, like a cow that yields its udder for the benefit of people, so Uṣas bares her breasts to bring light for the benefit of humankind \(3.58; 4.5\). Although Uṣas is usually described as a young and beautiful maiden, she is also called the mother of the gods \(1.113.12\) and the Aśvins \(3.39.3\), a mother by her petitioners \(7.81\), she who tends all things like a good matron \(1.48\), and goddess of the hearth \(6.64\).

Uṣas observes all that people do, especially as she is associated with the light that uncovers everything from darkness and with *ṛta*, moral as well as cosmic order. She is said to be the eye of the gods \(7.75\). She is known as she who sees all, but she is rarely invoked to forgive human transgressions. It is more typical to invoke her to drive away or punish one’s enemies. Finally, Uṣas is known as the goddess, reality, or presence that wears away youth \(7.75\). She is described as a skilled huntress who wastes away the lives of people \(1.92\). In accordance with the ways of *ṛta,* she wakes all living things but does not disturb the person who sleeps in death. As the recurring dawn, Uṣas is not only celebrated for bringing light from darkness. She is also petitioned to grant long life, as she is a constant reminder of people’s limited time on earth *\(7.77\).* She is the mistress or marker of time.
