+++
title = "02 PRTHIVĪ"

+++

The goddess Pṛthivī is nearly always associated with the earth, the terrestrial sphere where human beings live. In the *Ṛg-veda,* furthermore, she is almost always coupled with Dyaus, the male deity associated with the sky. So interdependent are these two deities in the *Ṛg-veda* that Pṛthivī is rarely addressed alone but almost always as part of the dual compound *dyāvāpṛthivī*, sky-earth. Together they are said to kiss the center of the world \(1.185.5\). They sanctify each other in their complementary relationship \(4.56.6\). Together they are said to be the universal parents who created the world \(1.159\) and the gods \(1.185\). As might be expected, Dyaus is often called father and Prthivi mother. There is the implication that once upon a time the two were closely joined but were subsequently parted at Varuna’s decree \(6.70\). They come together again when Dyaus fertilizes the earth \(Prthivi\) with rain, although in some cases it is said that together they provide abundant rain \(4.56\); it is not clear to what extent Pṛthivī should be exclusively associated with the earth alone and not the sky as well.

In addition to her maternal, productive characteristics Pṛthivī \(usually along with Dyaus in the *Ṛg-veda\)* is praised for her supportive nature. She is frequently called firm, she who upholds and supports all things \(1.185\). She encompasses all things \(6.70\), is broad and wide \(1.185\), and is motionless \(1.185\), although elsewhere she is said to move freely \(5.84\). Pṛthivī, with Dyaus, is often petitioned for wealth, riches, and power \(6.70\), and the waters they produce together are described as fat, full, nourishing, and fertile \(1.22\). They are also petitioned to protect people from danger, to expiate sin \(1.185\), and to bring happiness \(10.63\). Together they represent a wide, firm realm of abundance and safety, a realm pervaded by order \(*ṛta*\), which they strengthen and nourish \(1.159\). They are unwasting, inexhaustible, and rich in germs \(6.70\). In a funeral hymn the dead one is asked to go now to the lap of his mother earth, Pṛthivī, who is described as gracious and kind. She is asked not to press down too heavily upon the dead person but to cover him gently, as a mother covers her child with her skirt \(10.18.10–12\).

The most extended hymn in praise of Pṛthivī in Vedic literature is found in the *Atharva-veda* \(12.1\). The hymn is dedicated to Pṛthivī alone, and no mention is made of Dyaus. The mighty god Indra is her consort \(1.6\) and protects her from all danger \(12.1.11, 18\). Viṣṇu strides over her \(12.1.10\), and Parjanya, Prajāpati, and Viśvakarma all either protect her, provide for her, or are her consort. Agni is said to pervade her \(12.1.19\). Despite these associations with male deities, however, the hymn makes clear that Pṛthivī is a great deity in her own right. The hymn repeatedly emphasizes Pṛthivī’s fertility. She is the source of all plants, especially crops, and also nourishes all creatures that live upon her. She is described as patient and strong \(12.1.29\), supporting the wicked and the good, the demons and the gods. She is frequently addressed as mother and is asked to pour forth milk as a mother does for a son. She is called a nurse to all living things \(12.1.4\), and her breasts are full of nectar. The singer of the hymn asks Pṛthivī to produce her breasts to him so that he might enjoy a long life. Pṛthivī is also said to manifest herself in the scent of women and men, to be the luck and light in men, and to be the splendid energy of maids \(12.1.25\).

In sum, Pṛthivī is a stable, fertile, benign presence in Vedic literature. She is addressed as a mother, and it is clear that those who praise her see her as a warm, nursing goddess who provides sustenance to all those who move upon her firm, broad expanse. The *Ṛg-veda* nearly always links her with the male god Dyaus, but in the *Atharva-veda* and later Vedic literature she emerges as an independent being.
