+++
title = "07 RĀTRĪ"

+++

The goddess Rātrī is almost always associated with the night. Indeed, she is the night, and as such she is the presence or power that is petitioned by people for comfort and security in the dark hours before the triumphant return of the dawn. Her physical appearance is rarely mentioned, although she is sometimes described as a beautiful maiden along with her sister, Uṣas, the dawn. She is called glorious and immortal and is praised for providing light in the darkness, bedecked as she is with countless stars. Generally she is pictured as a benign being. She is lauded for giving rest to all creatures.15 She is praised for bestowing life-sustaining dew16 and with Uṣas is said to provide and strengthen vital powers.17 She is especially invoked to protect people from dangers peculiar to the night. Thus, she is petitioned to keep wolves away, to protect against thieves,18 and to protect people from any creature that might do them harm in the night.19

Despite Rātrī’s usually benign nature, some texts refer to her in negative terms or associate her with things inimical to people. In the *Ṛg-veda* she is chased away by Agni, the god of fire \(10.3.1\), and also by Uṣas \(1.92.11\). Rātrī is called barren \(1.122.2\) and gloomy \(10.172.4\) in comparison with her bright and bounteous sister, Uṣas. Occasionally she is associated with the very creatures or dangers of the night from which she is elsewhere asked to protect people.20 Rātrī, then, is not only the guardian of the night, the protectress of people during the dark hours of their rest, but the night itself and those things, both benign and hostile, which inhabit the night.

The majority of references to Rātrī in the *Ṛg-veda* link her with Uṣas, who is said to be her sister. Usually they are said to be two lovely maidens, sometimes twins. Together they are called powerful mothers \(1.142.7\) and strengtheners of vital power \(5.5.6\). They are also called weavers of time and mothers of eternal law. In their alternating, cyclical, and endless appearances, they represent the stable, rhythmic patterns of the cosmos in which light and dark inevitably follow each other in an orderly, predictable manner. Together they illustrate the coherence of the created order: the ordered alternations of vigor and rest, light and dark, and the regular flow of time.
