+++
title = "08 MINOR VEDIC GODDESSES"

+++

Several goddesses known to the *Ṛg-veda* are mentioned so infrequently that it is difficult to perceive what their distinctive natures might have been. Some of these minor goddesses seem to be synonymous with abundance. Puraṁdhi, Pārendi, Rākā, and Dhiṣaṇā, none of whom is mentioned more than about a dozen times in the *Ṛg-veda,* are all associated with bounty and riches. As is the case with most Vedic goddesses, their natures appear to be benign and their presences revealed through material well-being. Sinivālī is also a benign goddess but is specifically associated with progeny. She is described as mistress of the family, broad-hipped, and prolific. When she is invoked it is to grant the petitioner offspring \(2.32; 10.184\).

Another group of minor goddesses seems to be associated primarily with the sacrificial cult of the *Ṛg-veda.* When Iḷa, Bhāratī, Mahī, and Hotrā are mentioned, they are almost always being summoned to take their place on the sacrificial grass prior to a ritual. They are also almost invariably grouped with Sarasvatī. Iḷa \(Iḍa in the *Brāhmaṇas\)* seems to be associated with the sacrificial offering itself, specifically the cow from which many sacrificial objects were taken. She is called butter-handed and butter-footed, which is reminiscent of Agni’s description as the presence or deity who actually takes the sacrifice and transmits it to the other gods. While it may be the case that these goddesses are some type of personification of certain aspects of the sacrificial ritual, they are mentioned so seldom, and almost always along with a list of many other deities, that such a conclusion seems only a guess, with the possible exception of Iḷa \(Iḍa\). Why these goddesses happen to be invoked with Sarasvatī is also not clear. There is no indication that they are associated with rivers, and Sarasvatī is not a particularly important goddess in the sacrificial ritual itself.

The most interesting references in the *Ṛg-veda* to the goddess Sūryā, the daughter of the sun god Surya \(sometimes Savitṛ\), concern her wedding. All the gods desire her, but her father wishes to give her to Soma; however, it is settled that the first to reach the sun will wed her. The twin gods, the Aśvins, win the race and the bride, and although Sūryā is said to be given to the god Pusan \(6.58.4\) and to be wooed by Soma \(10.85.9\), the other references to her in the *Ṛg-veda* almost always describe her as riding in the chariot of her twin husbands, the Aśvins, who after winning her are said to have attained all that they desired \(8.8.10\). Although it may be implied that Sūryā is fair and desirable, there is actually little description of her beyond the rather obscure picture of her in the *Ṛg-veda* \(10.85\) in which she seems to be likened to the sacrifice and is said to pervade the cosmos. Her husband in this hymn is Soma; the hymn may be describing the interdependence of Soma and the sacrifice \(personified as Sūryā\) in the metaphor of a marriage. The Asvins in this hymn are the groomsmen of her father, which is unusual.

References to Dānu, Saraṇyū, and Saramā are so infrequent and so lacking in description that it is difficult to even speculate on what their distinctive natures might have been. Dānu is identified as the mother of the cosmic demon Vṛtra, who is defeated by the god Indra. She is compared to a cow \(1.32.9\), although her son, who is described as without hands and feet, is more reptilian in appearance. The word *dānu* is used elsewhere in reference to the waters of heaven; it may be that Dānu was associated with the formless, primordial waters that existed prior to creation, the waters in which Vṛtra hid and which he withheld from creation until they were freed by Indra’s mighty deed.

Saraṇyū is the daughter of Tvaṣṭṛ and the sister of Viśvarūpa. She is said to marry the god Vivasvat \(10.17.1\) and to give birth to twins, Yama and Yamī \(the progenitors of the human race\). It has been suggested that her nature is essentially impetuous, for her name means “quick, speedy, nimble,”21 but there are no references to this aspect of her nature in the *Ṛg-veda.* Saramā, whose name has a similar meaning, “the fleet one,” is in later literature known as the mother of dogs, a heavenly bitch. But there is no indication of this aspect in the *Ṛg-veda.* In the *Ṛg-veda* her only significant action is to seek out the thieving Panis, who have stolen cows, and to act as Indra’s messenger to the Paṇis in negotiating the return of the cows. Perhaps her ability to track and cross rivers hints at her later canine nature.

One hymn of the *Ṛg-veda* \(10.146\) refers to a goddess of the forest, Araṇyānī. From this one hymn we get a rather clear picture of the goddess. She is an elusive figure who vanishes from sight and avoids villages. She is more often heard than seen. She speaks through the sounds of the forest, or one may even hear her tinkling bells. She seems to make her presence known especially at evening, and those who spend the night in the forest sometimes think they hear her scream. She never kills unless provoked by some murderous enemy. She is sweetly scented, is mother of all forest things, and provides plenty of food without tilling.

This goddess is interesting for two reasons. First, she hints at an archaic type of goddess known as the mistress of animals, although there is no specific reference to her guarding animals or providing them for human hunters. Second, she sounds very much like the Yakṣīs of the later Indian tradition, those female beings who dwell in the forest, are worshiped away from the village, and who have, despite their generally benign qualities, certain uncanny characteristics. This late hymn of the *Ṛg-veda* may well be an early literary reference to a Yakṣī or to a goddess modeled on those indigenous creatures of the Indian forests.

Several important Vedic gods are said to have wives or consorts. None of these goddesses is mentioned very often in Vedic literature, but it is important to note their existence in light of subsequent Hindu mythology, in which many of the most important goddesses are consorts of well-known Hindu gods, and also in light of the later Hindu concept of *śakti*. The names of these early goddesses are usually formed simply by the addition of a feminine suffix to the god’s name: for example, Indrāṇī, Varunāṇī, Agnāyī, and in later Vedic literature Rudrāṇī \(the wife of Rudra\). With the exception of Indrāṇī, these goddesses have no independent character of their own. They are mentioned so infrequently and are so lacking in descriptive detail that they appear to be mere minor appendages to their husbands, who are powerful beings in the Vedic pantheon. Indrāṇī is mentioned far more often than any other goddess of this type, but even so it is clear that she is greatly overshadowed by her husband, Indra. She is described as beautiful, and one hymn of the *Ṛg-veda* pictures her as jealous of rivals \(10.86\). She is also called by the name śacī, which denotes power and suggests the later idea of *śakti,* the feminine, personified might of the gods of later Hindu mythology. Indeed, in another hymn \(10.159\) Indrāṇī-śacī boasts of having won her husband by conquering him and brags that he is submissive to her will. In the same hymn, however, she goes on to petition the gods to rid her of rivals for Indra’s favor, and elsewhere she is said to stay at home \(3.53.6\). Despite suggestions of the later *śakti* idea, then, Indrāṇī is actually a minor goddess of little power, despite her boasts to the contrary.
