+++
title = "04 Nyāsa"

+++
Two phenomena that share conceptual territory with āveśa are nyāsa and (prāṇa-) pratiṣṭhā. There is an important distinction between them: The latter two are intentional, textualized, and enjoined bodily constructions, transformations of intellectual and social practices (arguably these are the same thing) into sacred physical terrain. Nyasa (literally “setting upon, placing down, imposition”)38 is a common, and often standard, part of brahmanical worship that finds its greatest advocacy in the Tantras and Purāṇas. As a result, extended instruction of nyāsa may be found in virtually every manual of Hindu daily practice, including those sold outside the gates of Hindu temples everywhere in India.39 Nyasa is employed in obligatory rites (nitya) such as the daily saṃdhyā, the twice-daily rites of the twice-born performed at sunrise and sunset, as well as in the full range of rituals to be performed on special occasions, some calibrated calendrically (naimittika), and others performed to fulfill personal desires (kamya).40 Related to mudras or hand positions of esoteric significance (cf. Tantraraja Tantra 4.44d, which explicitly links a certain mudra with āveśa),41 nyāsa is a practice that combines simple mudras with brief mantras invoking names of deities, divine powers, ṛṣis, Vedic sacrifices, or letters of the alphabet. The intent of nyāsa is to impose or place the power of the mantras, and perforce the deities, and so on, which they inscribe, on or within various body parts, either one’s own or that of an image of a deity. This is effected, according to the widespread theology of nyasa, through a process called bhūtasuddhi, purification of the five fundamental elements (mahabhūtas)—earth, water, fire, mobile air, and all-pervasive space.42 The idea of a conjunction of deity and ritualist is old in India. The Bṛhaddevatā, a text of probably the mid-first millennium C.E. that organized Vedic knowledge according to the deities of the Ṛgveda, states as part of its conclusions that “fully introducing the deity into the mind” (manasi saṃnyasya devatām) while performing a sacrifice is a true signifier of knowledge.43

Abhinavagupta and Kṣemarāja describe mudra as both an instrument of āveśa and a state of possession itself. Gavin Flood explicates this: “To say that mudrā is a way of accessing higher layers of the cosmos means that individual consciousness is absorbed into or possessed (āveśa) by mudrā, or that the individual body absorbs mudrā into itself. The PTLV [Parātriṃsikālaghuvṛtti] says that one’s own body becomes possessed (āvesa) by mudrā and mantra, which can be read as, becomes a channel for, higher cosmic powers which erode the sense of individuality and distinction.”44 This agrees with the idiomatic use of āveśa and samāveśa elsewhere in the Kashmiri Śaiva and Sākta literature. Furthermore, say these philosophers, the body can become a bridge to these “higher cosmic powers” not just through mudrā but through āsana, the practice of yoga, presumably indicating variations on the teachings of Patañjali and other advocates of classical yoga.45 Āsana, they claim, is the yogic equivalent of bhūtaśuddhi, described above as the essence of nyāsa. “Both represent the destruction or purification of the gross individual body, in order that a divine body can be created.”46

Āsana, says Kṣemarāja, is not simply posture but the power (bala) of the supreme śakti.47 As such, it is the original and final agent of transformation. It follows, then, as Abhinavagupta states, that mudrā is also an exercise of power, bestowed in initiation.48 Kṣemarāja reinforces this, stating that all the actions of an awakened one (buddha) are in fact mudrā. In the Pratyabhijñāhṛdaya, he quotes the Kramasūtras, “which define this mudrā as the interpenetration of the inner and the outer due to the force of possession (āveśavaśāt); the entrance (praveśa) of consciousness from the external to the internal (antaḥ) and from the internal to the external.”49 Mudrā, āsana, and nyāsa, then, are not mere gestures or movements; they are nuances, signifiers, or resonances of āvesa, thus āveśa itself. In the same way, they are emblematic of an empirical, even scientific, paradigm in which spirit (śakti) or, more amorphously and less specifically, consciousness (cit), transmutes into power, pattern, and matter. As matter, they qualify as substance codes, in Marriott’s terminology. They operate through an alchemical process, replicating the process of symbolic and material creation (e.g., vegetable matter > coal > diamond, solar energy > potable gold), employing śakti as a beginning as well as an ending point.

Another phenomenon treated in the same conceptual terms as nyāsa and mudrā, being at once parts and the whole of āvesa, as well as its process, is orgasm (kampakāla). These four are viewed as the culmination of an organically fruitful act that replicates and “imposes” cosmic processes. According to Somānanda, orgasm reflects and recapitulates the ānanda (bliss) and camatkāra (astonishment) of Paramaśiva and thus, in the right perspective, can be a kind of realization. According to Somānanda, “pure consciousness is perceived in the heart when semen is discharged (visargaprasara).”50 The Vijñānabhairava states that “possession by Śakti or absorption in her—the term āveśa is ambiguous—occurs during the (sexual) excitement of uniting with Śakti (śaktisaṃgamasaṃkṣubdha).”51

As a process, nyāsa and mudrā are intended both to mirror and replicate the constitution of the original cosmic “person” as expressed in the Puruṣasūkta (Ṛgveda [ṚV] 10.90) and, in more extended fashion, in Purāṇic deities like Varāha, who is described at great length as Yajñavarāha, “Varāha as the embodiment of the sacrifice,” Varāha whose very body is composed of the spectrum of sacrifices.52 Both nyāsa as a practice and Yajñavarāha as a cosmic image represent an extension of the theme of a composite body and self noted earlier in examples from the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa and other vedic texts. It is important here to remember that in the Indian concept of possession, identity is not closed or limited by name or definition, but is open, flexible, and integrative. Nyāsa is all of these in both the construction and embodiment of the deity, ṛṣi, or other structure imposed on the ritualist.

Nyāsa mirrors and reconstructs an original or archetypal Puruṣa as well as later composite deities such as Yajñavarāha in that it is a process of resorption rather than emanation of the constituent units of the cosmos. It is an absorption into oneself, into one’s body and being or, in the case of (prāṇa)pratiṣṭhā, into the embodied form of the deity. The cosmic Puruṣa and Yajñavarāha not only emanate and disseminate the parts of the cosmos from their bodies, but embody these parts as their physical essence, a condition that is replicated in nyāsa. In this sense, nyāsa may be viewed as a simplified and dramatic reduction of the agnicayana, where the parts of the cosmos are reassembled in the form of the bird-shaped fire altar. This reassembled organic whole is regarded as nothing less than the creator god Prajāpati himself, who contains within him the entire cosmos. Both the agnicayana and nyāsa, then, become strategies for effecting “natural circulation,” though in these instances it is not essences or abstractions such as medhas (cf. Chapter 5) that are transferred or circulated, but actual cosmic (and social) structures that are collected into various patterns and energized, to be taken up anew by Prajāpati or any other deity (such as Kṛṣṇa or Śiva) and dispersed throughout the cosmos. In practice, nyāsa is envisioned as a procedure for consecration or enlivenment, performed in order to empower, sanctify, and protect the individual, the body (part), or the iconic form of a deity, all of which must be rendered pure for ritual and other spiritual activity. And what better for accomplishing this than (ritual) introduction of sacred elements into the body (or image) itself?

The Bhāgavata Purāṇa (BhP) provides an excellent example of nyāsa, along with compelling reasons why it should be practiced. BhP 6.8 provides the text of a Nārāyaṇa kavaca, or ritual construction of “armor” (kavaca), which enables the devotee to obtain the protection of Viṣṇu, here called Nārāyaṇa. The kavaca consists of nyāsa followed by a long hymn appealing to Viṣṇu and his many incarnations, body parts, and weapons (e.g., discus, mace, conch), for protection. The BhP (6.8.4–11) states that the nyāsa should be performed with “speech controlled” (vāgyataḥ), meaning that the mantras should be muttered inaudibly or recited silently. “One should equip or harness oneself with a protective covering fashioned from Nārāyaṇa”53 by placing different syllables of various mantras (e.g., om namo nārāyaṇāya, om namo bhagavate vāsudevāya) on parts of the body, hands, joints of the fingers, heart, and crown of the head. Finally, the devotee should complete the transformation by visualizing him or herself as the Supreme Self in the form of the embodied Lord manifest as knowledge, splendor, and ascetic heat, and possessed of the six divine virtues (power, beauty, fame, wealth, wisdom, and dispassion). In this condition, one should then recite the hymn (BhP 6.8.11). In addition, Vaiṣṇavas in practice inscribe tilakas or sectarian marks with white sandalwood powder (gopīcandana) on twelve different parts of the body, each one accompanied by the recitation of one of the twelve principal names of Kṛṣṇa. This is for the purpose of forming the image of Kṛṣṇa on and in one’s body.

Another extended example of nyāsa demonstrates the manner in which brahmanical thought constructed a “self,” an entity close to a “person,” through an accumulation of powers that are conferred a nondual or advaitic trajectory as they accumulate. The text is a quasi-vedic series of brief mantras, some of which bear vedic accentuation, which occurs as part of the introductory apparatus to the recitation of the Rudrādhyāya, the “Chapter on Rudra” from the Taittirīya Saṃhitā (TS, 4.5.1–11). This introduction, including the nyāsa, is an invention of post-vedic ritualists who recognized that the Rudrādhyāya, the most revered of all recited passages from the TS, had acquired a special sanctity and therefore deserved its own ritual apparatus. Although the Rudrādhyāya was initially prescribed for recitation during the agnicayana,54 the content of the text suggests that it likely stood on its own as an early recitational passage.55 As an independent text, it is today (as has likely been for thousands of years) recited in a large number of semi-vedic, which is to say Purāṇic and Agamic, rites practically in an ad hoc fashion. As such, the recitational ritual has grown around it. The text of the Rudrādhyāya from the TS is enveloped in a classic ritual framework in which it is conferred a liminal existence, following Victor Turner’s notion of framing liminality.56 During the initial part, the rite of entering that liminal, timeless, space during which the text is recited, the ritualist, who is assumed to be a brahmanical follower of one of the half-dozen ritual sākhās or branches of the TS,57 recites this nyāsa and “intends” it on his body. After entering into this mantrically instigated state of divine personhood, the ritualist then recites the text of the Rudrādhyāya. The following account of this is taken from a popular handbook published by the Ramakrishna Mission called Mantrapuṣpam.58

After enjoining the ritualist to bathe and perform appropriate purification, to keep the senses under control and observe celibacy, to wear white garments and face the deity, he should establish the deities in his body (ātmani). The text continues:

prajanane brahmā tiṣṭhatu | pādayor viṣṇus tiṣṭhatu | hastayor haras tiṣṭhatu | bāhvor indras tiṣṭhatu | jaṭhare ’gnis tiṣṭhatu | hṛdaye śivas tiṣṭhatu | kaṇṭhe vasavas tiṣṭhantu | vaktre sarasvatī tiṣṭhatu | nāsikayor vāyus tiṣṭhatu | nayanayoś candrādityau tiṣṭhetām | karṇayos aśvinau tiṣṭhetām | lalāṭe rudrās tiṣṭhatu | mūrdhnādityās tiṣṭ.hantu | śirasi mahādevas tiṣṭhatu | pṛṣṭhe pinākī tiṣṭhatu | purataḥ śūlī tiṣṭhatu | pārśvayoḥ śīvāśaṅkarau tiṣṭhetāṃ | sarvato vāyus tiṣṭhatu | tato bahiḥ sarvato ’gnir jvālāmālāparivṛtas tiṣṭhatu | sarveṣv aṅgeṣu sarvā devatā yathāsnānaṃ tiṣṭhantu | māṃ rakṣantu ||

May Brahmā be established in [my] organ of generation. May Viṣṇu be established in [my] feet. May Hara be established in [my] hands. May Indra be established in [my] arms. May Agni be established in [my] belly. May Śiva be established in [my] heart. May the Vasus be established in [my] throat. May Sarasvatī be established in [my] mouth [organ of speech]. May Vāyu be established in [my] nostrils. May the Sun and the Moon be established in [my] eyes. May the two Aśvins be established in [my] ears. May Rudra be established on [my] forehead [lalāṭa]. May Āditya be established on the front of [my] head [mūrdhan]. May Mahādeva be established on [my] head [siras]. May Vāmadeva be established on the crown of [my] head. May the Staff-Bearer [pinākin] be established on [my] back. May the Bearer of the Trident [śūlin] be established on [my] chest. May Śiva and Śaṅkara be established on [my] flanks. May Vāyu be established everywhere. Finally, may Agni be established everywhere outside [me], surrounding [me] like a garland of flames. May all the Gods [devatāḥ] establish their respective places in all [my] limbs. May they protect me!

agnír me vācí śritáḥ | vg ghdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | vāyúr me prāṇé śritáḥ prāṇó hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | sryo me cákṣuṣi śritáḥ | cákṣur hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | candrámā me mánasi śritáḥ | máno hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | díśo me śrótre śritáḥ | śrótraṃ hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | po me rétasi śritáḥ | réto hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | pṛthivī me śárīre śritáḥ | śárīraṃ hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | óṣadhivanaspatáyo me lómasu śritáḥ | lómāni hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | índro me bále śritáḥ | bálaṃ hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | parjányo me mūrdhní śritáḥ | mūrdh hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | īśāno me manyáu śritáḥ | manyúr hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | ātm me ātmáni śritáḥ | ātm hdaye | hdayaṃ máyi | ahám amte | amtaṃ bráhmaṇi | púnar ma ātm púnar yur gāt | púnaḥ prāṇáḥ púnar kūtam gāt vaiśvānaró raśmíbhir vāvṛdhānáḥ | antás tiṣṭhatv amtasya gopḥ ||

Agni abides in my speech. My speech abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Vāyu abides in the lifebreath. My lifebreath abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Sūrya abides in my eye. My eye abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. The moon abides in my mind. My mind abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. The directions abide in my ear. My ear abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Water abides in my semen. My semen abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. The earth resides in my body [śárīra]. My body abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Cultivated and wild plants abide in my hair. My hair abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Indra abides in my strength. My strength abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Parjanya abides on the front of my head. The front of the head abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Isāna abides in my passion [manyu]. My passion abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. The self [ātmán] abides in my ātman. My ātman abides in my heart. My heart abides in me. I abide in immortality. Immortality abides in bráhman. Again, may my ātmán come to me for another lifespan [púnar yuḥ]. Again, let my lifebreath come to another desire [púnar kūtam] and let that Agni common to all [vaisvānará] choose me with his rays of light [raśmí]. Let the final limit of immortality be established as my protector.

asya śrīrudrādhyāyapraśnamahāmantrasya aghora ṛṣiḥ anuṣṭupchandaḥ saṃkarṣaṇamūrtisvarūpo yo ’sāv ādityaḥ paramapuruṣaḥ sa eṣa rudro devatā | naman śivāyeti bījam | śivatarāyeti śaktin | mahādevāyeti kīlakam | śrīsāmbasadāśivaprasādasiddhyarthe jape viniyogaḥ ||

Aghora is the seer of the great mantra that constitutes this chapter called the Illustrious Rudrādhyāya. The meter is anuṣṭubh.59 The deity is Rudra, the Supreme Being [paramapuruṣaḥ] who is the same as yonder Sun, whose natural embodiment is that of Saṃkarṣaṇa. The seed mantra is namaḥ śivāya [“Obeisance to Śiva”]. The śakti mantra is [namaḥ] sivatarāya [“Obeisance to the Greater Śiva”]. The kīlaka mantra60 is [namo] mahādevāya [“Obeisance to Mahādeva”]. When the goal of repeating [the Rudrādhyāya] is to obtain the grace of Sāmbasadāsiva, [this is the] ritual procedure [to be followed].

oṃ agnihotrātmane aṇguṣṭhābhyāṃ namaḥ | darśapūrṇamāsātmane tarjanībhyāṃ namaḥ | cāturmāsyātmane madhyamābhyāṃ namaḥ | nirūḍhapaśuban dhātmane anāmikābhyāṃ namaḥ | jyotiṣṭo mātmane kaniṣṭhikābhyām namaḥ | sarvakratvātmane karatalakarapṛṣṭhābhyāṃ namaḥ | agnihotrātmane hṛdayāya namaḥ | darśapūrṇamāsā tmane śirasi svāhā | cāturmāsyātmane śīkhāyai vaṣaṭ | nirūḍhapaśubandhātmane kavacāya huṃ | jyotiṣṭhomāt mane netratrayāya vauṣaṭ | sarvakratvātmane astrāya phaṭ | bhur bhuvas suvar om iti digbandhaḥ |

Om! Obeisance to the two thumbs, which have as their nature the agnihotra. Obeisance to the index fingers, which have as their nature the darśapūrṇamāsau. Obeisance to the middle fingers, which have as their nature the cāturmāsyas. Obeisance to the ring fingers, which have as their nature the nirūḍhapaśubandha. Obeisance to the little fingers, which have as their nature the jyotiṣṭoma. Obeisance to the palms and the backs of the hands, which have as their nature all the sacrifices. Obeisance to the heart, which has as its nature the agnihotra. Obeisance to the head, which has as its nature the darśapūrṇamāsau. Obeisance to the crown of the head, which has as its nature the cāturmāsyas. Obeisance to the aura,61 which has as its nature the nirūḍhapaśubandha. Obeisance to the third eye, which has as its nature the jyotiṣṭoma. Obeisance to the astral weapon, which has as its nature all the sacrifices. Phaṭ! Thus, the syllables bhuḥ, bhuvaḥ, suvaḥ, and om are fixed in the [four] directions.

It is important to read this in full, to translate this simple passage replete with redundancies, because the cadence of the text, its simplicity and comprehensibility, its organization and teleology, are reminiscent of drum rolls and chants of shamanic ritual.62 These are the cadences of possession, even as it is Sanskritized and brahmanized. Nyāsa, we can say, is brahmanical possession. It is a re-anatomization within an individual of the dismembered Puruṣa. The performer, a ritualist familiar with the cadences of Sanskrit, is not just reciting a text and connecting the dots between mantras and body parts—he (usually he) is training and prompting his body to resonate with the cadences of the text. These cadences, in Foucault’s words, embed “minute and local social practices” that wield and articulate cultural and, eventually, political power. In addition to the minimal speech-act of recitation, hence re-creation, the ritualist employs various mudrās regularly during the course of the recitation. Holding these mudrās, he touches the respective body part into which the deity is said to enter, with his right (or if necessary his left) hand. Thus, this performance of the Rudrādhyāya is physically engaged, not merely recited. Ritually, which is to say intentionally and therefore not meaninglessly, the reciter adopts the persona of the gods as he recites the text. As he invests his body with divinity, he confers on himself the power and authority with which the performance becomes effective. The brahman ritualist who recites the Rudrādhyāya in this context does not experience deity possession in the same manner as does a devotee at the temple of Khaṇḍobā in Jejuri on the new moon day that falls on a Monday (somavatī amāvāsyā).63 Nor will he experience the devotionally driven āveśa of a devotee performing sevā on his or her beloved deity, or the possession that Śaṅkara experienced upon entering the body of the dead king Amaruka. But there can be little doubt that the ritual is designed to reorient the ritualist toward a divine realm that is the product of millennia of brahmanical tinkering. This tinkering, which has a track record of success, at least in the minds and hearts of the ritualists, is in fact tinkering with practices of power. These practices are acts of purification, isolation, and proprietary possession of divinity, facets of brahmanization that are discussed elsewhere and need not detain us here.

Two further matters must be mentioned here. First, this possession, as I designate it, is described without the use of the primary critical vocabulary discussed here, derivatives of ā/pra-√viś or √gṛh. Instead, the verbs √sthā (tiṣṭhatu, etc.) (to establish, stand) and √śri (śritaḥ) (abide in, cling to, take possession of) establish both the motion and the contiguity that characterize āvesa, praveśa, and so on, and are nearly synonymous with them in expressing an appropriate entrance or pervasion. The root √sthā (tiṣṭhatu, etc.) is employed to express the occupation of deities on or in body parts. These deities are Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Hara, Agni, Śiva, the Vasus, Sarasvatī, Vāyu, Sun, Moon, the Aśvins, Rudra, Āditya, Mahādeva, Vāmadeva, Pīnākin, Śūlin, Śiva, and Śaṅkara, and finally all the gods together (sarvā devatā). Just as appropriately, √śri (śritaḥ) provides the sense of pervasion for natural forces, including fire, wind, sun (these three are the representatives of Agni on the terrestrial plane, the mid-region, and the celestium), the moon, the directions, water, earth, wild and domestic plants, Indra, Parjanya (Rain), Īśāna (one of the eleven Rudras, Śiva as the sun), and the self (ātmán). Thus, forms of these two verbs are used to express different aspects of what may be expressed broadly as possession.

Second, to return to an earlier point, the entire passage reflects a late first- and early second-millennium C.E. brahmanical strategy of advaitic reinscription that homogenizes the earlier, much more diverse but by now superannuated, vedic ritual theology. Although the phenomenon of identifying one entity, idea, or object with another—not randomly but as a “code of connections”64—has long been noticed in vedic and succeeding brahmanical thought, here is a text (and I could easily locate dozens of similar ones) that is engineered to reconstruct personal identity through acts of self-identification with deities and vedic sacrifices while simultaneously subordinating each identification to an absolute bráhman. In the key second section of the passage translated, Agni is said to abide in speech, speech in the heart, the heart in the “me” of the ritualist, that “me” in the immortal, and finally the immortal in bráhman. Thus commences a strategy of “practical Vedānta”65 designed to compel the ritualist to realize the identity of a deity with a body part, then with the individual self, and finally with bráhman. In this ritual exercise, the individual’s body parts, heart, and self are so fully identified with specific deities that it must fall within the range of deity possession, though that possession is ultimately nullified and transcended by a final identification with the absolute brahman.

Regardless of the perfunctory manner in which this is ordinarily performed (doubtless a consequence of text-based performance), a transformation in perception is assumed to occur. At the very least, this transformation is a result of a mantra-induced realization of a pre-existing condition, a transformation of quality, or a transfer of essence, at most through a more substantial infusion of the very deity, ṛṣi, and so forth, into the body or image. This infusion, clearly, is reminiscent of certain aspects of āveśa: it is envisioned, intended, and set in motion by the practitioner, and it is an immersion of distinctly positive forces into oneself or an image of one’s deity. In short, deities, powers, and so on are invited to take possession of the body. But they are invited in a brahmanically programmatic, that is, “textual,” way, one that emphasizes purity at the expense of spontaneity and danger. It is likely that the introduction of nyāsa into standard brahmanical ritual represented a domestication of certain tantric (or vedic) initiatory processes or even those of popular religious possession. Through exercising programmatic control, which occurred as a result of the elimination of its unstructured, noninstitutionalized, unpredictable, and (thus) frightening aspects, possession was drained of its spontaneity. It became vidhi (ritual prescription), which denied to it experiential possibilities beyond text, by rendering it representational in the sensibilities of the ritualist, rather than actual. This is not, however, to say that, as a general rule, confinement of possession within ritual boundaries necessarily reduced its experiential potency. Indeed, for many, particularly among non-brahmanized sects, such confinement served to confer acceptable social dimensions upon it, thus legitimizing it as a viable form of religious expression, as ethnographic work has decisively shown. Examples of the successful ritual demarcation of the unpredictable can be readily seen among the devotees of Khaṇḍobā at Jejuri or in dramatic performance such as Terukkūttu or Teyyam.

One further example of nyāsa should be discussed. This may be seen in the fourth chapter (ullāsaḥ) of the Kulārṇavatantra (KAT). The author of this well-known text of the Kaula tradition of Śaiva ritual, written sometime in the first centuries of the second millennium C.E., is unknown, but, according to the colophon at the end of the first ullāsa, the text is supposed to be the fifth section (khaṇḍa) of the Urdhvāmnāyatantra, a text now lost, but said (surely symbolically) to have consisted of 125,000 verses. Such statements aside, the fourth ullāsa consists of instructions for two progressions of nyāsa, one called “small” (alpaṣōḍhā, 4.17–18), the other “great” (mahāṣoḍhā, 4.19–130). Strikingly, the KAT states that the mahāṣoḍhānyāsa, which is indeed quite intricate, is for the purpose of devatābhāvasiddhi or perfection of the psychophysical experience (bhāva) of the deity (4.19), in this case Śiva. We have seen above that in bhakti texts the term bhāva is tantamount to āvesa; thus here the KAT can mean only that the aspirant transforms every aspect of his being (usually a male is presumed) into that of Śiva. This is nothing less than possession, as discussed above. In a verse at the end of this ullāsa (4.128), Īśvara or Śiva, who reveals this secret, reinforces the importance of this nyāsa to the goddess, his dialogical partner: “One who practices this nyāsa obtains ājñāsiddhi [the power to assure that whatever one orders is carried out]. In the world there is no protection greater than this, the bestower of the siddhi of devatābhāva. This, no doubt is the truth, it is the truth, O Fair-faced One.”

The nyāsas in this ullāsa are sixfold and construct—or reveal—systematic links between mantras, deities, body parts, and elements of the cosmos. These identifications disclose a transformation of the aspirant, his devatābhāva, brought on through a code of connections that harks back to the vedic Brāhmaṇa and Āraṇyaka texts for their authority. The first is called prapañca-nyāsa (the nyāsa of manifest creation). This consists of three parts. In the first, the aspirant links a string of bija mantras, Sanskrit vowels, sixteen names of the goddess Lakṣmī, body parts, and geographical forms, and at the end the same bija mantras in reverse order. For example, the first two to be recited are: au ai hrīśrī hsau a prapañca rūpāyai śrīyai namaḥ śirasi s-hau śrī hrī ai au, meaning “au ai hrī śrī hsau a obeisance to Śrī on the head in the form of the manifest universe s-hau śrī hrī ai au”; then au ai hrī śrī hsau ām dvīparūpāyai māyāyai namaḥ mukhavṛtte s-hau śrī hrī ai au, meaning “au ai hrī śrī hsau ā obeisance to Māyā on the face in the form of a continent s-hau śri hrī ai au.” The remaining loci are: ocean (jaladhi), mountain (giri), town (pattana), ritual altar (pīṭha), field (kṣetra), forest (vana), religious refuge (asrama), cave (guha), river (nadī), crossroad (catvara), the domain of “sprout-born” entities (udbhidja, viz. plants), the domain of “sweat-born” creatures (svedaja, viz. mosquitoes, insects, etc.), the domain of egg-born beings (aṇḍaja, viz. birds), and the domain of “embryo-born” creatures (jarayuja, viz. mammals and higher primates). In this way, the aspirant realizes the entire physical universe within him. The second part of the prapañca-nyāsa does the same for units of time, from the smallest, the lava (tiniest fraction of a second), to the largest, the pralaya (period of cosmic dissolution), identifying these with manifestations of the goddess Kālī. The third links the ten manifestations of Sarasvatī with various aspects of the functioning being. These are the five fundamental elements (pañcabhūta) linked with Brāhmī; the five senses (tanmatra) linked with Vāgīśvarī; the five organs of action (karmendriya) with Vāṇi; the five sense organs (jñanendriya) with Sāvitrī, the five principal prāṇas with Sarasvatī; the three guṇas with Gāyatrī; the fourfold inner sense organ (antaḥkaraṇa) consisting of mind (manas), intelligence (buddhi), ego (ahaṃkāra), and consciousness (citta) with Vākpradā; the four states of awareness (waking, dreaming, deep sleep, and turiya, the “fourth” or transcendental state) with Saradā; the seven bodily constituents (skin, blood, flesh, fluid, marrow, bone, and semen) with Bhāratī; and the three bodily humors (doṣa: vāta, wind; pitta, bile; and kapha, phlegm) with Vidyātmika. Thus, through the prapañca-nyāsa, space, time, and human function are appropriated, experienced, and transformed within the body of the individual.

The remaining sections of the sixfold nyāsa are the bhuvana-nyasa, in which different divine Śaktis and their entourages of hundreds of millions of yoginīs are identified on the body with the fourteen planes of the universe, employing the same bija mantras and formulaic pattern as used above. In the murti-nyasa, the aspirant places on his body the sixteen forms of Viṣṇu and their corresponding śaktis, the twelve manifestations of Śiva and their śaktis, and the ten forms of Brahmā and their śaktis. Then follows mantranyāsa, in which billions of two-lettered mantras, three-lettered mantras, and so on ascending up to sixteen-lettered mantras are placed symbolically by their goddesses on ascending parts of the ritualist’s body. Then comes devata-nyasa, in which various goddesses and their respective legions of thousands of realized beings, celestial beings, and male deities are imposed on various body parts. Finally, in mātṛkā-nyāsa the aspirant places different “Mother Goddesses” (mātṛkā) along with myriad tens of millions (anantakoṭi) of members of the families of the Bhairava form of Śiva, including negatively charged beings (bhūta, preta, piśāca, etc.) and other denizens of the universe under their authority, on ascending body parts and energy centers. In sum, says Śiva himself in the KAT (4.119), “When nyāsa is performed in this way, O Goddess, the mantrin who is patient in times of both contraction and grace without doubt becomes a direct manifestation of the highest Śiva.”

In this way the individual, rather than retreating into a kind of advaitic oneness, expands into one. The process is, literally, one of taking possession of, arranging, and integrating the constituent parts of this world, the cosmic realms, all earthly and divine beings, and the functions of manifestation. The nature of life as a practical reality requires that the individual protect him or herself in infinite ways from the responsibility and awesomeness of the universe (cf. Arjuna in the eleventh chapter of the Bhagavadgītā). This shield—culturally, individually, or otherwise configured—enables that person to construct and conduct a manageable definition of his or her own individuality. Nyāsa, when used as part of an initiatory apparatus, as it is in Tantra, becomes an instrument for effacing that safe definition and emerging as a complex multiform personality that assumes divine and incomprehensible proportion; indeed, it is so awesome that it forces the individual to reconsider selfhood.
