+++
title = "06 Possession in Buddhist Tantras"

+++
Tantric or Vajrayāna Buddhism spread from North India, Kashmir, and Nepal into Tibet between 500 and 1000 C.E., as many scholars have shown. It was then enhanced in Tibet by the indigenous Bön and other local cults and cosmologies and by the spectacular environment that is Tibet, all of which have conferred on it a unique position among the various versions of Asian Buddhism. Among the unique features of Vajrayāna Buddhism is the importance of initiations, a legacy of the Śaiva traditions of Kashmir and northern India. It was not simply a matter of taking refuge in the Three Jewels—the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Saṇgha—but of receiving initiation into the practice of multiple Buddhist deities and maṇḍalas. Indeed, the path as conceived by Vajrayāna Buddhism was fueled by initiations. This is not to discount the complexity of tantric Buddhist doctrine, the subtle layerings of Buddhist philosophical thought, the profound sectarian differences, the importance of assiduous practice, or the complex relationship between lay Vajrayāna and monastic practice and institutions. But it was initiation—infusions of divine energy delicately forged by detailed attention to ritual—that motivated the remaining aspects of Vajrayāna Buddhism.

An opportune, though admittedly uneasy, comparison may be made with the Mahābhārata. Bearing in mind that the latter is a single (if multi-authored)76 text, albeit a gigantic all-encompassing epic, while Vajrayāna Buddhism is a complex and far-reaching religious system, we must recall an observation made earlier: that the plot of the MBh is consistently advanced through curses and boons, acts of divine intervention, possession, odd synchronicities, and other extraordinary occurrences. If the Vedānta, Sāṃkhya, Dharmasāstra, and other palimpsests of orthodoxy were stripped away (even from the critical edition), a mythic series of miracle tales, some wondrous, some horrific, would be most of what remains of the MBh.77 At the risk of oversimplifying, I might say that in the case of Vajrayāna, if the yāna were stripped away, what would remain is the vajra. By this I mean tales of innumerable saints, such as Padmasambhava, Nāropa, Saraha, and Milarepa, arduous pilgrimages to far-flung places such as Kailāśa and Mānasarovara, devotionalism with powerful resonances in South Asia, and yogic siddhis. But most prominent as vajra are the initiations. We can see from the following brief extract that these have obvious points of resonance with Śaiva śaktipāta initiation described by Abhinavagupta in the Tantrāloka.78

The passage is a translation from the Vajrabhairava abhiṣeka as compiled initially by the seventh Dalai Lama, based on Indian sources. Also included is a brief section from this Dalai Lama’s autocommentary in which he quotes Nagabodhi’s description of the signs of āveśa.79

Expunge [obstructers] with: oṃ hrīṃ śrīṃ vikṛtānana hūṃ phaṭ.  
Purify into emptiness with: oṃ svabhāvaśuddhaḥ sarvadharmaḥ svabhāvaśuddho ’ham.  
Think the following: From emptiness I myself become the syllable hūṃ; I myself, the syllable, become a vajra marked with hūṃ; I myself, the vajra, become the great Vajrabhairava; my body is dark blue with one face and two arms holding in my hands a goad and skull bow; I stand with my left foot extended. On the crown of my head from baṃ arises a circular white water-shape marked with a vase; on that shape is haṃ. At my heart from laṃ arises a square yellow earth-shape marked at its corners with three-pronged vajras; on that shape is huṃ. At my navel from raṃ arises a red triangular fire-shape, intense and blazing; on it is āḥ. Under my feet from yaṃ arises a bow-shaped, rippling blue wind-shape, its two far corners marked with pennants; on it is jhaiṃ, in a fierce and unbearable form. Agitated by the wind, the jhaiṃ ascends to the lotus of fire at the navel; again due to the wind’s agitation, the earth at the heart begins to blaze, and from the water at the crown a stream of nectar falls; it completely satisfies me. Chant: oṃ hrīṃ śrīṃ vikṛtānana hūṃ hūṃ phaṭ phaṭ / āveśaya sthambhaya / ra ra ra ra / cālaya cālaya / hūṃ haṃ jhaiṃ hūṃ phaṭ //80 As a result of saying this many times, the wisdom [beings] enter. At that time, with the visualization of it being thrown by the wind and with firm deitypride in Guru Vajrabhairava, one should brandish the vajra with the right hand, ring the ghaṇṭa [bell] with the left, and properly scent [oneself?] with incense. Visualize that the light-rays of the fire in one’s body spread out to the ten directions and invite all the buddhas and bodhisattvas in the form of Mañjusri Yamāri; like rain falling, they melt into one. Then the vajra is placed on one’s head, and by saying, tiṣṭha vajra (“Stay, Vajra!”), one should make the blessing firm.

[After going through the meaning of the mantra, the Dalai Lama comments as follows]: As a result of the Wisdom beings entering in that way, the minds of the deities—i.e., the non-dual wisdom that has the nature of the first bodhisattvabhūmi and so on—actually enter the mindstream of the disciple, or else one visualizes and believes that it has done so. Thereby, the wisdom blessing has entered the disciple; this is called the “Shared [blessing]” [Tib. skal mnyam; Skt. sabhāgaḥ]. Concerning the signs that [the wisdom beings] have entered, the root Tantra of Guhyasamāja says, “… shaking and tremors …” Ācārya Nāgabodhi comments, “One should know that the signs of entrance are shaking, elation, fainting, dancing, collapsing, or leaping upward.” In the translation by Chag lotsawa, it says, “… shaking, hair standing on end …” Thus, many signs are said to arise, from leaping—to a height of one cubit, two cubits or even eight cubits—to hair standing on end, trembling and so on.

The use of long series of bija mantras, the visualization of maṇḍalas as embodiments of deities, the assertion of deities entering the initiate, and Nagabodhi’s citation of “shaking and tremors,” and so on as signs of successful initiation are familiar from Indian Śaiva initiatory sequences. We might here recall the term ātmabhāvaparigraham (taking possession of a [new] personal existence), discussed in Chapter 7, appearing in an early Buddhist text. In that text, it appeared to indicate taking on a new rebirth. Here, however, many centuries and Buddhist cultures removed, the notion of taking possession of a new personal existence is radically altered to indicate a transformation occurring in this life as a result of undertaking a powerful initiation. As one might expect, Vajrabhairava, called Vajrāveśa (“he who is possessed by a vajra”), is represented iconographically, as the image in Plate 2 attests.

This transformation is analyzed in the Kālacakratantra (KT) more explicitly in terms of possession. It is a possession strongly reminiscent of the brahmanical, liturgically actualized possession discussed earlier in this chapter. Like the brahmanical example, this discussion is situated in terms of constructing a divine body from the visualized image in a maṇḍala. Among the texts that describe such maṇḍalas are, in addition to the KT, the Vajrayāna texts Sādhanamālā and Niṣpannayogāvalī, which describe a large number of maṇḍalas to be used as meditation aids.81 These texts describe two types of beings, called samayasattva and jñanasattva. Both Stephen Beyer and Alex Wayman translate samayasattva as “symbolic being” and jñanasattva as “knowledge being.” These, says Wayman, “are among the most difficult and important ideas of the Buddhist Tantric literature.… The samaya-sattva is the yogin who has identified himself with a deity he has evoked or imagined, while the jñāna-sattva is either a human Bodhisattva, or a celestial Bodhisattva or Buddha.”82 The samayasattva, more accurately, is the visualized image of the deity, with which the meditator can identify in the “self-generation” stage of deity yoga. Beyer states that the samayasattva is “the projection upon the ultimate fabric of reality of the practitioner’s own visualization,” that the meditators visualization manipulates and “empowers the senses”83 of a jñānasattva, thus dissolving it into the figure of a samayasattva.84 This occurs through the operation of the mantra jaḥ hū ba hoḥ, which summons, absorbs, binds, and dissolves the former into the latter. Beyer quotes Tsongkh’apa: “If one makes the knowledge being enter in, his eyes and so on are mixed inseparably with the eyes and so on of the symbolic being, down to their very atoms: and one should visualize their total equality.”85 It is striking how close this is to the precise physiological mirroring and pervasion that define āveśa in the yoga literature, to Vipula Bhārgava’s possession of Ruci in the MBh and to the imprinting of form and essence found in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka and Kauṣītaki Upaniṣads’ description of a moribund father entering the body of his son.


PLATE 2. Vajrāveśa (rDo-rje dbab-pa), a gate guardian (dvārapāla). His mantra is oṃ sarvavit sarvāpāyagatigahanaviśodhani hūṃ hoḥ phaṭ (Om, Omniscient One, the Deliverer from the Bonds of All evils, Hūṃ Hoḥ Phaṭ).
The image of Vajrāveśa is taken from Laxman S. Thakur, Buddhism in the Western Himalayas (New Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2001), 115. For the mantra, see Tadeusz Skorupski, The Sarvadurgatiparisodhana Tantra: Elimination of ‘All Evil Destinies (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983), 9, 128; cf. 93, 260–261.

The Vajratārā sādhana chapter of the Sādhanamāla describes the attraction of a jñānasattva being located in the northern part of a certain maṇḍala. The āveśa is initially induced by repetition of the syllable ra (rekāra), the same syllable prescribed for possession of Vajrāveśa.86 Then a specified pose is maintained with vajra, bell, and so on. The aspirant then installs this being on a lunar orb in the heart and worships it appropriately. The mantra jaḥ hū va hoḥ should be recited, says the Sādhanamālā, while performing the attracting, entering, fixing, and pleasing (ākarṣaṇapraveśanabandhanat oṣaṇam) of the jñānasattva.87 The agents in the following passage from the KT are, then, aspirants who fit the description of samayasattva.

The KT passage in question, from the abhiṣekapaṭala, the section on initiation, contains a passage on the visualization and internal manifestation of both bodhisattvas and wrathful deities (krodharāja), notably Vajrāveśa, who is emblematic in this text of the latter category. The commentator, Kalkin Śrīpuṇḍarīka, fills in important lacunae; thus the following account weaves together the KT and Kalkin’s commentarial notes. The aspirant (which the KT consistently calls śiṣya [disciple]) first prepares himself for this possession or re-embodiment by reciting the mulamantra for Vajrāveśa ten million times followed by one hundred thousand offerings with it into a fire. This mantra is: o a ra ra ra ra la la la la vajrāveśāya hū.88 Then the maṇḍala is consecrated with a long series of mantras, and the aspirant positions himself ritually, with bell and vajra in place, hands and fingers arranged in proper mudrās, suitably attired, and gifts properly distributed.89 He then declares vows of good conduct, service to gurus, buddhas, and bodhisattvas, protection of his senses, and so on. He bathes, freshens his body with scented powder, and reinforces his vows (vrataniyamayutaḥ, v. 87). He momentarily assumes earlier stages of practice (pūrvabhūmyāṃ nivesya, v. 87) by inviting and pacifying the directional buddhas and those of the external circles of the maṇḍala with the standard meditation mantra o āḥ hū. He purifies his tongue with three mouthfuls of pañcāmṛta,90 screens off or places a cloth over these external circles of the maṇḍala (presumably to sharpen his concentration), and lights incense, which encourages possession (dhupam āveśanārtham). Then, says Kalkin Śrīpuṇḍarīka, through meditation alone he gains the ability to become possessed by the wrathful deity (smaraṇamātreṇa krodhāveśaṃ karoti).

The next verse (v. 88), with Kalkin’s help, tells us how this deity behaves. After the deity is fully manifested within the aspirant, he is capable of killing all beings moving and nonmoving, of crushing them, by easily obstructing their progress. By threatening that host of Māras (māravṛndam), that destroyer of dharma (Kalkin glosses this as dharmaviheṭhakam), he makes them fall to the ground, immobile. Even an aspirant who does not know the proper movements is then able to perform the “vajra dance” (vajranṛtyam). He executes this dance in mid-air, thus slaying these killers of dharma, by placing his left foot forward and right foot back (pratyālīḍhādipādaiḥ). Then he laughs and sings the vajra in the form of a loud hū, which could never emanate from a human and which creates fear in this inimical host of Māras. This, then, is the nature of a wrathful deity when the practitioner is being possessed by it.

The next several verses of the KT are best translated in full, along with Kalkin Śrīpuṇḍarīka’s introductions.

“[The commentary states:] Now, with respect to establishing [within oneself] the body, etc., of a wrathful deity [krodharāja] or bodhisattva, it is said: After the body is possessed [kāyāveśena], a yogin will realize the purpose of that body by acting under the influence of its fundamental qualities [prakṛtiguṇavaśāt]. After becoming possessed by its voice [vāgāveśena] the yogin becomes its spokesperson and secures victory over gods, nagas, and asuras. After becoming possessed of their mind [cittavesena], the past and present, secret within everyone’s heart, becomes known. After becoming possessed of their knowledge [jñānāveśena], the yogin becomes a buddha, a guru of gurus, an achiever of great worldly attainments, and a ruler over all.

The commentator explains that the fundamental qualities (prakṛtiguṇa) of a wrathful deity and a bodhisattva are, respectively, ferocity (raudra) and peacefulness (śānta), startlingly in keeping with the discussion in Chapter 8 of the rasas associated with possession in South India. Just as wrathful deities and bodhisattvas can fly through the air (kurvanty ākāsagamanam), a good disciple should be able to enter hell worlds, fly over the world, become invisible, and fly to mountain tops as a result of possession by a divine body. Just like Mañjusri, even a stupid student whose senses are under control as a result of possession by divine speech should be able to overcome gods, nāgas, and asuras. Possession by a divine mind91 enables the pupil to know the past, present, and future, all of which are invisible (atītānāgataṃ vartamānam adṛṣṭaṃ sarvam). Becoming possessed by knowledge means that gaining control of the psychomental predispositions from previous births enables one to become perfected in the world.

[The commentator states:] Now, with respect to establishing [within oneself] the eye, etc. [of a wrathful deity or a bodhisattva], it is said: After becoming possessed by its earth element, the yogin becomes sturdy as a mountain, and after becoming possessed by its water element, it attains the same coolness. After becoming possessed of its fire, the yogin acquires its fiery nature, and by becoming possessed of its wind, similarly he acquires its dryness. After becoming possessed of its emptiness, the yogin becomes invisible and becomes like an aereal being on the surface of the earth.92 In this way, the composite form, constructed under the influence of fundamental qualities, is to be understood.

Kalkin discusses the results of possession by (as well as of) divine elements and divine senses. He says that the aspirant becomes so powerful as a result of arrogating the divine counterpart of the earth element that he cannot be moved even by hundreds of men. Embracing the divine water element enables him to ward off fever even when it rages within him. After assuming within his body the divine fire, he gains the ability to burn whatever he touches. By taking possession of the wind element of a wrathful deity or bodhisattva he can blow anything he embraces many leagues away. And by assuming the element of emptiness he can make anything he touches invisible. When possessed by the divine eye, he sees divine form, though it is insubstantial (adṛṣṭadravyam). Similarly, possession by divine hearing enables one to hear the unheard sounds of beings; possession by a divine mind (divyamanas) permits one to gain the knowledge of another’s thoughts (paracittajñānam); possession of a divine body and sense organs enables one to obtain divine touch and achieve a divine abode; possession of a divine tongue results in a divine sense of taste, and of a divine organ of smell a divine sense of smell.

[The commentator states:] Now the symptoms of those with divine possession will be explained. O king, for those who know the proper mantras, possession [āvesa] is realized through powerful meditation [bhāvanā]; but sometimes also through different kinds of devotional service [sevā], through various kinds of stipulated practice, through repetition of mantras, and so on. Success in achieving this kind of possession [siddhi] of those who know mantras is nowhere possible in the generation of a maṇḍala [even] by buddhas with a great variety of richly textured experiences, without first establishing themselves in this manner.

Kalkin states that “various kinds of stipulated practice” (bahuvidhasamaya-) means protective or reinforcing practices that engage bodhicitta or the vow to work towards the enlightenment of all beings. Most of the practices referred to here are visualizations and possession of different classes of Buddhist divinities and spirits. These, says Kalkin, involve entrance into a maṇḍala and are described in the fifth paṭala of a text called the Jñānasiddhi or otherwise taught by one’s guru.

[The commentator states:] Now, for quelling one’s possession, the following is said: After the aspirant relinquishes his possession, the Jinas, who have gone to the part of the maṇḍala that represent his Buddha-families, should touch his forehead, his heart, the top of his head, his navel, his throat, and his anus with their triple-pronged vajras [svatrivajraiḥ] in order to invoke protection for him. Then the disciple becomes eligible to enter the maṇḍala [atra] upon being blindfolded and given a yellow robe. For the sake of convention [i.e., the collection of merit, not wisdom], one should also grant to him the vows that contain the station [gati-, i.e., rank] of the supreme ones.93

Because it is believed to be as fraught with danger as entering into or remaining in a state of possession, disembarking from such a state is equally specified. All Indic ritual texts on possession (mostly unpublished manuscripts, as we see in Chapter 11) give detailed instructions on how to “abandon” (tyaktvā, KT 92) or, in Kalkin’s gloss, “calm” or “quell” (upasamana) possession. Kalkin, consistent with others, prescribes a series of mantras designed to invoke the protection of various buddhas. He states that if an aspirant is possessed by a wrathful deity, and so on, then the teacher (ācārya) should ask him what the effect was. He should recite the three syllables o āḥ hū over a flower and place it on the aspirant’s head. The latter will then be released from his possession and return to his own place. This appears to mean that after the aspirant leaves the consecrated space, in this case, the proximity of the maṇḍala, he is back in “his own place” (svasthānam). Unlike in other texts we examine in Chapter 11, neither the KT nor Kalkin states explicitly that the aspirant enters a maṇḍala or yantra that is drawn on the ground and sits down on it, thus becoming himself a quasi-deity within the maṇḍala and enacting his possession from that locus of power. This, however, is certainly the case,94 enabling the aspirant to more easily convert the visual to the visualization. With the syllable o, the ācārya invokes the protection of the buddhas on the aspirant’s head, then with hū on his heart, and with haṃ on the crown of his head. This is accomplished through the practice of his own “triple-pronged vajra,” which Kalkin clarifies as his body, speech, and mind. Similarly the ācārya should place the syllable ho on his navel, āḥ on his throat, kṣaḥ on his perineum. Thus, this nyāsa follows the possession rather than precedes it and, unlike the brahmanical recorporealizing, is enacted by the teacher. Kalkin adds that the long (dīrgha) syllable hū is the vajra of speech, while the short (hrasva) syllable (presumably hū) is the vajra of the mind. The latter part of this verse seems to indicate that the aspirant’s monastic vows only superficially, or at least only in part, serve the purpose of “traditional” study of Buddhist doctrine and practice. In fact, however, in tantric Buddhism they may be deployed to keep secret more esoteric practices. These secrets, says Kalkin, are laden with merit (puṇyādisaṃbhāraḥ) and include auspicious rebirths in buddha realms all the way up to the status of Tathāgata Sakyamuni. This is in keeping with a theme of secrecy in India that extends back to the vedic Brāhmaṇas and, most pointedly, the Āraṇyakas, texts that were to be studied only in the seclusion of a forest.
