+++
title = "01 Sanskritic Culture and the Culture of Possession"

+++

Ethnographic work at the beginning of the twentieth century, which has been supplemented and revitalized during the past forty years, shows that spirit or deity possession is a widespread epstēmē—a historically situated discourse, phenomenon, and practice—in Indian thought, culture, religion, and medicine.[^1] However, if our knowledge of the subject were limited to the accounts of classical Indologists and others who have privileged the “high” intellectual and religious traditions while eschewing the history of actual religious practice, we would scarcely know of the existence of this phenomenon, much less its pervasiveness. One might say that it is the “ism” of Hinduism, the Hinduism essentialized by its most literate propagators and translators that has nullified and delegitimized its breathtakingly broad spectrum of popular practice, including possession.[^2] More specifically, non- or scant recognition of possession in premodern India has been due to a longstanding aversion among educated Judeo-Christians as well as educated Hindus, for whom possession has fallen outside the realm of both reason and social accountability.[^3] Perhaps the most common perception—and consequent stigmatization—of possession among both academic and indigenous orthodoxies is that it is a nettlesome aberration, a blemish on the face of epistemological order, a phenomenon subject to benign neglect, or, at most, sanitized into nonrecognition. To whatever degree this perception is borne out by taxonomies in both Sanskrit and regional languages that distinguish various loci and states of possession (a topic dealt with extensively below), the more important point is that possession and, indeed, emotion itself, the kinder, gentler ancestor of possession, have been considered to bear the stigma of primitivism:[^4] they are associated with people of lower social rank, including low castes, tribals, and women,[^5] or more generally with those lacking literacy, the great (and, before modern times, extremely rare) tool generally believed capable of bestowing introspection, self-knowledge, and control.[^6] Therefore, discussion of it has been avoided or denounced by the self-conceived (and, by no accident, highly literate) orthodox among both scholars and indigenous practitioners. And among scholars, even when this stigma has not been inflicted, possession as the exclusive property of lower-ranking individuals has been assumed so casually as to preclude a search for it among other groups and individuals. Even the eminent sociologist Louis Dumont declares possession a “mystic ecstasy … which so far we have not encountered at a learned level.”[^7] The present study aims to rectify these shortcomings.

[^1]: See references in Stanley 1988:7, Jones 1968, and Schoembucher 1993. A small gem of a book (with hardly a single reference to India), which anyone interested in the subject must seriously examine, is Bourguignon 1976; see also Boddy 1994, a global review of secondary literature on possession.

[^2]: “Hinduism” takes on a life of its own when it becomes a concept wielded by a self-interested elite. As Foucault writes about Christianity in his essay “Technologies of the Self,” it “has always been more interested in the history of its beliefs than in the history of its real practices” (Foucault 1988:17). The academicians’ (especially anthropologists’) quest for an “essential culture” is lucidly criticized in Turner and Turner 1998, their controversial book asserting strong, even incontrovertible, evidence for cannibalism among the Anasazi of the American Southwest at the end of the first millennium C.E. It is important to note that though anthropologists were once as guilty as others, e.g., Indologists, of reifying and essentializing culture, anthropologists in particular are now at the forefront of questioning this sort of reification.

[^3]: Humphrey and Laidlaw note, “avowedly atheist academics [still] routinely display deep Protestant prejudices” (1994:57n1). This occurs notably in translations. I understand from William Sax (personal communication, November 1999) that among those who now cast a cold eye on possession are scientists and Hindu nationalists—not surprising in either case, as both trumpet the ultimacy of their respective theologies. I might mention here that one of the problems in dealing with possession in South Asia is that, in spite of the fear and derision cast on it by certain early evangelical Christians (see Chapter 2), it was never the target of colonialist discourse; it was factored out, mostly ignored by nineteenth- and twentieth-century occidentalizing narratives of Hinduism. Thus it was not manipulated, constructed, or reconstructed as part of a colonizing project or a nationalizing discourse. The sub rosa quality of possession, sub rosa perhaps because of the fluidity of the South Asian person, to which the South Asian and the occidental were blind for very different reasons, rendered it unaccountable for either colonizing or nationalizing.

[^4]: Carstairs (1957) observed a pronounced repugnance toward devotional religion and the singing of religious hymns among high-status brahmans, Rajputs, and Jains of Rajasthan. Among academics, however, especially anthropologists, the study of emotion has gained legitimacy in the past three decades; cf. Lynch 1990 and Marks and Ames 1995.

[^5]: This is beginning to change in certain quarters. For example, the town of Mehndipur in eastern Rajasthan hosts a temple to Hanumān, called Bālājī, as well as several other facilities well known for exorcisms and other treatments for psychological disorders; cf. Kakar 1982:53–88; and the recent work of Dwyer, esp. 2003; see also Chapter 4, n. 16. Most of the clientele at Bālājī are from first-generation literate families, thus with strong memories of the lifeways of oral cultures, many of whom come from great distances (relevant here is the work of Luria, cited in Ong 1982). For information above and beyond that presented by Kakar and Dwyer on the possession and temples at Mehndipur, I am indebted to Antti Pakaslahti, who has been conducting fieldwork for many years on the processes of psychological healing that occur there.

[^6]: Ong 1982 develops this as a major theme.

[^7]: Dumont 1970:57. Although Dumont often criticizes his great predecessor, Max Weber, here they agree. In 1917 Weber remarked of brahmans “that orgiastic and emotional-ecstatic elements of the ancient magic rites were not taken over and for long periods either completely atrophied and were tolerated [only] as unofficial folk magic” (1970:345). Cf. Weber 1917 [1970] and 1958:137, cited in Gellner 2001:34. Weber continued: “The status pride of cultured men resisted undignified demands of ecstatic therapeutic practices and the exhibition of neuropathic states … [but] could take quite a different stand toward the forms of apathetic ecstasy … and all ascetic practices capable of rationalization” (1958:149, cited in Gellner 2001:35).

In this study, I press two overriding contentions, both of which not only are paramount for the present study but have implications for the methodology of future scholarship. The first is that the force of the ethnographic accounts should elicit a re-examination of classical texts for evidence of possession. The second is that possession as described by anthropologists and other ethnographers, and as understood by native and scholastic orthodoxies, does not represent the full spectrum of possession as revealed in Sanskrit texts. No doubt, such possession is described in or assumed by certain Sanskrit texts, and the bulk of the present project is dedicated to the exploration of Sanskritic possession. However, as shown below, the category of possession as understood in Sanskrit literature must be expanded beyond the parameters assigned to it by previous scholarship, which is largely drawn from prevailing Western notions. As an indigenous category in ancient and classical India, possession is not a single, simple, reducible category that describes a single, simple, reducible experience or practice, but is distinguished by extreme multivocality, involving fundamental issues of emotion, aesthetics, language, and personal identity.

Both of these contentions contribute to my principal project here, which is to retrieve, as far as possible from texts, an understudied aspect of ancient and classical Indian cultural practice, religious experience,[^8] and disease production. I become suspicious of the apparent nonexistence of possession in antiquity when we read present accounts, such as that of David Knipe, who states, based on fieldwork in East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh, “it appears that the number of householders subject to possession states is astonishingly high, and the phenomenon occurs within families of all communities as a central component of religious life.”[^9]+++(5)+++ This suspicion is verified, at least for non-Sanskritic classical culture, when we read David Shulman’s reports on “Tamil Hinduism.” Beginning in the Pallava-Pāṇṭiya period in the sixth century C.E., writes Shulman, “The focus is entirely on the interaction between the devotee and the god who has entered him, mastered or ‘possessed’ him without destroying his empirical, sensually motivated, autarchic being.”[^10]

[^8]: I do not feel it is necessary here to problematize the term “religion” or “religious” by replacing it wholesale with “way of life” or any similar phrase, as Ronald Inden and some of his students have done. “Religion” remains an adequate term around which supplementary concepts such as belief, creed, practice, ritual, liturgy, and institution may be organized. See Inden, Walters, and Ali 2000, esp. pp. 23ff.

[^9]: Knipe 1997.

[^10]: Shulman 1991:51.

Despite vivid descriptions of possession in Tamil texts of the first millennium C.E., which on the whole bear out the contemporary ethnographies, as lucidly discussed by Glenn Yocum,[^11] most Sanskrit texts, conspicuously “canonical” religious texts, entirely neglect—or, perhaps, avoid—discussing what people actually do or experience. The reason for this is well known: The major commentaries on the philosophical darśanas and primary texts of aesthetic theory set the epistemological agendas for the remainder of religious discourse in Sanskrit. The principal epistemological feature of these primary texts and commentaries is a quest for programmatic perfection, with unwritten rules that discourage discussion of personal experience except as a mythical, fictional, or paradigmatic figure might have a paradigmatic experience. These texts clearly are mindful of the requirements of canon, which, as mentioned, privilege theory over experience.[^12] Thus Sanskrit texts are almost always oriented uncompromisingly toward concepts, prescriptions, and mythology—what their authors understood to be “true”—but rarely toward “human” concern (except insofar as theorizing is a human concern)—what we (and probably they) deemed to be “real.”[^13] However, with persistent searching—a task doomed to incompleteness—perhaps we can begin to retrieve descriptions of this “deemed reality” from texts that both approximate those found in ethnographic literature and shed light on the parallel issues of emotional construction and personal identity in India.

[^11]: Yocum 1982:187–194.

[^12]: Cf. Halbfass 1988:388–402.

[^13]: This tendency was noted as early as the Atharvaveda; cf. Heesterman 1962. The major exception to this is in bhakti, which, as noted in Chapter 9, does not easily fit the paradigm. The conflict between precept and practice is a major concern of Bell 1992.

The problem of retrieval, however, is not just one of oppositional texts; equally problematic is scholarly re-engineering of possession states, a problem that continues to the present day, albeit rather reduced from that of previous decades or centuries. It is well known by now that the academic agendas of respectable Indological scholarship were set in the middle of the nineteenth century by Europeans who cast a long shadow of doubt on the “authenticity,” hence validity, of a number of subjects.[^14] The important subjects, which quickly became canonical, which is to say orthodox, in Indology, following to some extent a sanitized brahmanical presentation, were the Vedas, Sanskrit grammar (vyākaraṇa), the “six systems” of Indian philosophy (ṣaḍdarśana), Buddhism and Jainism, law (dharmaśāstra), epic poetry (kāvya), and, to a lesser extent, poetic theory (alaṃkāraśāstra). Among the subjects neglected by respectable scholars were Tantra, bhakti, and astrology (jyotiṣa), the texts of which, interestingly, are included in disproportionately high numbers in manuscript collections throughout India, but were cast into disfavor by the orientalism of the day.[^15]+++(5)+++ Factors weighing against these latter texts were their relative modernity, their popularity, and their intellectual movement away from the more classical texts, which, following the orientalist prerogative (consonant with their nostalgia for classical Greece and the Renaissance), expressed in general the ascendancy of reason.+++(4)+++ Thus certain topics and texts were destined for neglect because they participated in and typified a perceived intellectual and cultural malaise that rendered the defeated, superstitious, caste-ridden, economically straitened, and technologically underdeveloped India the natural subjects of the European Enlightenment. In other words, not only were most of these texts composed after the close of the first millennium C.E., which is to say on the wrong side of the tracks, temporally, to count as true or ideal representatives of ancient India, but their very subject matter was beneath the intellectual and cultural prestige or dignity of contemporary European scholarship.[^16]+++(5)+++

[^14]: For my comments on the notion of authenticity in Indian ritual (and in general), see F. Smith 2001b:449–450.

[^15]: Trautmann (1997:23ff.) reminds us that not all orientalist scholars of the earlier periods should be branded as “orientalist” in its current pejorative sense.

[^16]: Considerable attention has been paid in recent years to the “construction” of the ancient and classical “East” by the West. Among the more noteworthy studies are Inden 1990, Trautmann 1997, Bishop 1989.

If the brahmanical orthodoxies engineered popular and experiential content out of their texts, if they cavalierly shredded context and imposed an artificial and hegemonic discursive order, as standard Indology suspects—and this is a big “if”—it becomes immediately necessary to pose a question that will inevitably bear on everything dealt with here: Are Sanskrit (and other classical Indic) texts appropriate sources for our inquiry? More precisely, is Sanskrit literature or Sanskritic culture capable of representing the interests of a clientele more broadly based than a brahmanical elite that is usually characterized (and caricatured) as unregenerate and epistemologically prejudiced? At this point, which is to say until we have recounted and taken stock of the evidence—or its absence—we must be content with the unsatisfying observation that this question is fraught with ideological considerations and is thus unanswerable.

Nevertheless, a preliminary inquiry into this question is possible through a consideration of two opposing viewpoints on the capabilities of Sanskrit literature. In one corner is the eminent historian and Sanskritist D. D. Kosambi, who does not mince his words in the introduction to his critical edition of a collection of Sanskrit court poetry and miscellanea, the Subhāṣitaratnakoṣa, compiled in the eleventh or twelfth century C.E. in Bengal by one Vidyāpati. Kosambi observes that the life depicted in such poetry “was not shared by most Indians of the poet’s or of any other time; in essence, not even by the poet himself.”[^17] According to Kosambi, Sanskrit poetry, as well as classical Sanskritic culture, was the shared property—as well as the shared fantasy (Kosambi would likely regard it as a shared conceit)—of a brahman/ ruler class collusion.[^18] The end product was “the empty bombast of a Rājaśekhara,” thoroughly detached from the lives and livelihoods of the majority.[^19] In the other corner is the Sanskritist Richard Lariviere, who parries “criticisms of Sanskrit philology” in a wonderfully contentious article entitled “Protestants, Orientalists, and Brāhmaṇas: Reconstructing Indian Social History.”[^20] It is Lariviere’s view that “if we return to the philological techniques and values that have been exhibited with such consistency in the study of Greek and Latin classics, and that were once an important part of Sanskrit philology, but seem, in recent years, to have fallen out of favor, … [the result will be] to give the fullest possible voice to the views of classical Indians—of all social classes.” To achieve this, he states, “we must carefully and thoroughly edit their texts.” In Lariviere’s view, “[t]he better the data we have the better our answers will be, and philology provides the data.” Although Lariviere sanctimoniously calls for more and better critical editions of Sanskrit texts as the central requirement in the noble mission of expanding our knowledge of the historical South Asian underclasses, it must be remembered that in the Subhāṣitaratnakoṣa Kosambi has also taken on the task of constructing a critical edition, always with a view toward understanding Indian social history—and has arrived at radically different conclusions. Regardless of how this debate eventually plays out—and I am not particularly optimistic that Lariviere’s hypothesis will be upheld in any great measure[^21]—the present work is, I hope, an example of data-gathering from a large number of Sanskrit texts and of how such data gathering can help us to retrieve and identify some of the religious views and practices of a broad spectrum of ancient and classical Indian society.[^22] In the process I hope to demonstrate implicitly some of the areas in which both Kosambi and Lariviere might be right.

[^17]: Kosambi and Gokhale 1957:xlvi.

[^18]: That this is true can hardly be doubted, though it is equally true that Kosambi oversimplifies matters. Many of Kosambi’s ideas and historical conclusions are dated.

[^19]: Ibid.:1. Rājaśekhara is, in fact, proud of his literary skills, twice referring to himself as an expert in all languages: sarvabhāṣāvicakṣaṇa in Bālarāmāyaṇa 1.10, and savvabhāṣācadarain Karpūramañjarī 1.8; cf. Karpūramañjarī, ed. Konowand Lanman, p. 199.

[^20]: Lariviere 1995. He proposes three categories of scholarly Other: “orientalist critics,” with Edward Said as its exemplar; “essentialist critics,” typified by Ronald Inden; and “distortionist critics,” including Sheldon Pollock and other postcolonial and postmodern theorists. Lariviere’s terms should, of course, be understood as “critics of orientalism,” “critics of essentialism,” and “critics of distortionism.” Said attained his status as exemplar through his well-known (and often-criticized) work Orientalism (1978); Inden through his thought-provoking (but increasingly criticized) work Imagining India (1990); and Pollock through his brilliant (and controversial) article “Deep Orientalism? Notes on Sanskrit and Power Beyond the Raj” (1993a). Lariviere might peg Kosambi as a prescient postcolonialist, though it is likely that Kosambi would have enjoyed the label.

[^21]: Indeed, the evidence he provides in his article, preliminary though it admittedly is, has less to do with reconstructing the history of India’s underclasses through the construction of critical editions than with a careful reading of well-known Sanskrit texts. For other acknowledgments and discussions of the dissonance between text and the practice of daily life, see Bailey 1995; Salomon 1989.

[^22]: The most ambitious critical editions undertaken thus far (and it is difficult to imagine more ambitious projects) are the Poona Mahābhārata (MBh) and the Baroda Rāmāyaṇa. It is difficult to say that the editions of these texts in their critical incarnations contribute more to our knowledge of the underclasses than does any single manuscript or regional rescension of these texts. One test of Lariviere’s theory would be for a brave, preferably retired, Indologist with an enormous amount of time to spare to examine the entire critical edition of the MBh with all the text-critical notes and appendices of excised passages, thus determining which manuscripts or rescensions contribute most in this area. Perhaps it would be better to sensitively examine texts on śūdradharma. An excellent beginning to this has been made by Vajpeyi 2004, a foray into the “philology of oppression” (I am grateful to her for this felicitous phrase).

Several scholars have declared that possession is conspicuously absent in Sanskrit texts, at least possession as classically understood from ethnographies. In addition to Dumont, cited above, Richard Gombrich states, “Later brahmanism … denied all value to possession states and they were screened out of brahmanical religion. To be possessed is to lose one’s self-awareness and self-control. Brahmānism inculcated control.”[^23]+++(5)+++ Gombrich’s remarks were to some extent responsible for alerting me to the possibility of possession in Sanskrit texts. While it is true that brahmanism inculcates control, to what extent, I wondered, did brahmans strictly observe brahmanism, and to what extent was this aspect of brahmanism an instigating force in a broad sampling of Sanskrit texts? I wondered, in other words, was the relationship between brahmans, brahmanism, and brahmanical texts very different a thousand or two thousand or three thousand years ago from what it is today? It is important for our purposes to note that brahmans, perhaps as much as others, participate in rituals of possession (and enter into states of possession), as is evident in the bhūta cults of South Kanara District,[^24] the pilgrimage to Nandadevi documented by William Sax,[^25] bhakti derived possession by smārta women in Madras by Mary Hancock,[^26] and rites of exorcism in Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Varanasi, and doubtless elsewhere.[^27] This is analogous to the participation of Buddhists, unswervingly loyal to their textual traditions and text-based practices, in an array of possession rituals in Tibet, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, if not elsewhere.[^28] As is the case with Buddhists and Buddhism, participation by brahmans in ritual must be distinguished from “brahmanism” as Gombrich employs the term. Indeed, many if not most brahmans demur in practice, at least part of the time, from the “ism” of brahmanism, and probably always have. We examine in Chapter 5 a passage from the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad that confirms this in part.[^29] The tidy conflation of brahmans and brahmanical practice with the “ism” is all too hastily associated with both and leads to conclusions such as Dumont’s, which are little more than weary stereotyping. To be more generous, however, what Dumont and Gombrich are doubtless referring to are the official brahmanical doctrines espoused by the literary elite for the past two or three millennia, as they appear in the normative dharmaśāstra texts and philosophical darśanas. In this sense, Gombrich is correct in noting the importance of “brahmanism” in delimiting the parameters of control, self-awareness, and the self as a single discrete independent entity.+++(4)+++ Indeed, these are some of the issues I must address in unpacking the category “possession.”

[^23]: 

    Gombrich 1988:36–37; see the quotations from Weber in n. 7. Gombrich extends this view to the more general field of emotion: “my guess is that the apparent dearth of emotion in early Indian religion is due to its being censored out by the intelligentsia, both brahman and heterodox, just as they censored out the widespread practice of possession” (p. 170).+++(4)+++ I am in essential agreement with Gombrich, though I see more evidence of emotion in early Indian religion than Gombrich does; see Smith 1998b.
    
    It must be noted, however, that control is a major issue in all possession, brahmanical and non-brahmanical. See Wadley 1976 for an account of dank, a ritual of snake possession on the fifth day of the bright half of the month of Śravaṇ (nāg pañcamī), Wadley states, “Control is necessary at all times … there is control for causing possession, cessation of possession, and control during the rite itself. At no point is there lack of control” (p. 247). Gellner essentially supports Gombrich and states, “Lack of control is evident in spirit possession. Thus one can see how both women and low castes are associated with spirit possession, and why high-caste males should shun it, except in closely defined esoteric contexts. This secret possession by the tantric gods of Buddhism and Hinduism is part of tantric initiation in both religions” (2001:42).

[^24]: On the bhūta cults of South Kanara District, see Prabhu 1977. For a more theoretical treatment, see Brückner 1987, 1995. I am also grateful to Edwin Gerow, who informed me of his own observations in Karnataka. For another important study of possession among brahman women, see Harper 1963.

[^25]: Sax 1991.

[^26]: Cf. Hancock 1995.

[^27]: I have observed brahmans undergoing exorcism and expiation for spirit possession in Pune (various temples and exorcists), Varanasi (Piśācmocan temple), central Kerala, and Bālājī.+++(4)+++

[^28]: For Tibet and Nepal, see, for example, Mumford 1989. For Thailand see Morris 2000. Both Mumford and Morris observe a conflict of interests. On the one hand, both lay Buddhists and priests condemn shamanistic practice, including varieties of possession, perhaps a relic of clashes long past. On the other hand, they furtively—though sometimes openly—attend these same ceremonies. Thus it comes as no surprise that Morris observes: “For many Buddhist men, mediumship still has the rank odor of the feminine and emanates the aura of a not-yet-recuperated primitiveness” (p. 85), recapitulating a stereotype that has persisted for millennia. Nevertheless, in later—though by no means recent—forms of Buddhism there was a reaction against this. See, for example, Faure 1998:100–104. He refers to eccentrics in Chan Buddhism who “seem to represent the nostalgia of a lost spontaneity” (p. 102). These eccentrics were initially regarded as subversive and dangerous, but after they became culturally fashionable they lost their subversive edge. This transgressiveness revealed a deep-seated ambivalence, which served “to legitimize the norm that it transgresse[d], like an exception confirming the rule” (p. 104). This masculine construction of the weakness of women was expressed as penetrability, no doubt sexual in origin, which Morris sees in “the ethnography of Buddhist gender ideology … as softness or pliability. Thus women are deemed within dominant ideology to be soft-souled or malleable as well as volatile.… For this reason, they are said to be particularly unsuited to the ascetic traditions of Buddhist meditation and particularly likely vehicles for spirits” (pp. 124–25).

[^29]: See Chapter 5 on Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (BAU) 3.3.1, 3.7.1.

Restated in the form of fundamental questions, these issues may be expressed as follows: Is the “self” or “person” revealed and explicated in possession states genuine? Is there a true self (assuming for the moment that this is a viable concept and can be located) contaminated or camouflaged by possession states, spirits, or deities? Is the self a singular stable undiluted entity? Or is it a referential, explanatory convenience, an individualized composite construction, and thus unrealizable beneath its layerings—in agreement with the Buddhists? If the former, is deity or spirit possession a superimposition on a pure and realizable self? If so, then possession should be distinguished from that insular self, which is to say that the self and the personality are distinct. If the latter, is such possession a random or occasional component in a mutating multiform self, and if so can we really call this a “self” rather than a “person”? Or—another possibility—is possession merely a trope, a significator for an essentially plural or composite self? These are all questions intended to explore the experiential and soteriological trajectories of possession as well as its historical and sociopolitical contexts.

With respect to Buddhists, to whom control and mindfulness were paramount, Gombrich observes that they “set themselves against such vulgar lack of self-control in favour of what they considered more ‘civilized’ standards.”[^30] Thus, possession skirted the various crossroads of native scholasticism, “civilized standards,” and control, self or otherwise. The assumed—and unaddressed—questions were: Is the deity or the true self revealed more accurately when one is in control or out of control? Is the self revealed out of control different from or, as some would have it, inferior to the one revealed while under control? Or, is there not much difference; which is to ask, does being out of control lead to states of knowledge, surrender, and spontaneity that are similar or identical to those manifest while under control?+++(5)+++ Or, is spontaneity in religious expression possible only under controlled (which is to say ritualized) circumstances?[^31]

[^30]: Gombrich 1988:64; also: “both brahmanism and Buddhism oppose possession and commend self-control” (p. 145).

[^31]: States of possession often are ritually controlled, as in the Siri cult in South Kanara district of Karnataka (Claus 1979).

With respect to the integrity of the self, which cannot be easily separated from the body, the early and middle Vedic texts are clear. For example, the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (9.5.1.11) insists on a self that is constitutive of an intimate interplay between human, divine, and sacrificial bodies, while the Atharvaveda (11.3.1–2,7–8) holds that “of this porridge Bṛhaspati is the head, Bráhman is the mouth, heaven and earth the ears, sun and moon the eyes, the seven seers the in- and out-breaths … dark metal its flesh, red metal its blood, tin its ash, gold its complexion.”[^32] Whether porridge or human being (and often there is little difference), this theme of a composite body and self recurs in Vedic and Purāṇic literature (the figure of Yajñavarāha, the “sacrificial boar,” and the kāmadhenu or wish-fulfilling cow is employed in Chapter 10 to help explicate this) and, to a great extent, sets the tone for widespread textual and extratextual acceptance of possession as a natural phenomenon and of power sharing across apparent individual boundaries.

[^32]: Trans. by White 1996:12.

As suggested, one of the primary goals of this study is to examine the notion, generally recognized by anthropologists, though not by religious orthodoxies, that possession is not just one thing and apply this insight to the evidence from Sanskrit and other classical Indian texts. What I hope to show is that the category of possession as it has been commonly understood in religious studies and Indology, where it has been addressed at all, does not work well in the context of the classical Indian view of the self. As I demonstrate, it is a self with permeable layerings and boundaries, both of which constantly shift and mutate, and this can be known in part through a study of possession, as suggested by recent anthropological studies. Janice Boddy, an anthropologist who has studied possession in Sudan, writes that possession, within a wide spectrum of anthropological situations, is “a broad term referring to an integration of spirit and matter, force, or power and corporeal reality, in a cosmos where the boundaries between an individual and her environment are acknowledged to be permeable, flexibly drawn, or at least negotiable.”[^33] Furthermore, I hope to show that the questions asked above can be answered, at least in part, through a better understanding of the experience and construction of possession in premodern India.

[^33]: Boddy 1994:407.

I retain the term “possession,” though it may not work very well in some of the circumstances that I discuss.[^34] But I preserve it because the broad semantic boundaries of the terms under study here provide no attractive alternative. Consistent with this, I also suggest, in agreement with Gombrich, that the disregard or oversight of possession is a product of its construction (or lack thereof) by orthodoxies. In spite of concerted efforts at ideological exorcism, possession is frequently found in Sanskrit texts, but locating it, thinking about it, and understanding it cannot be undertaken by applying our usual category of possession, even if Gombrich is quite correct given his assumptions of what possession actually is.

[^34]: This problem has arisen for other scholars as well. See, for example, Shulman 2002, who rightly labels the term possession “problematic” (p. 145) and admits to using it “with some trepidation” (p. 133).

Close scrutiny leads me to conclude that forms of religious experience and expression since the time of the Ṛgveda disclose much more possession than hitherto believed. After reviewing notions of possession derived from ethnographic literature, important because these notions define the commonly understood terms of our investigation, I discuss examples from a broad range of Sanskrit texts, including the Ṛgveda and Upaniṣads, the two great epics, the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyaṇa, the primary classical medical texts, classical poetry and fiction, classical yoga and Vedānta texts, tantric texts in both their philosophical and ritual incarnations, sectarian devotional texts, and of utmost importance for “negative” possession an array of āyurvedic texts. Throughout I attempt to summon a few conclusions about possession that might augment our appreciation of the phenomenon.

In spite of the generally accessible chronology of the selected texts and genres (and presumably of the development of the concepts contained therein), I must emphasize that, in view of the thematic organization of the subject matter presented here, I cannot rigorously adhere to the chronological order of text composition in assembling my account of possession in Sanskrit texts. Although text chronology does not necessarily correspond to the logical order of my presentation, neither is my assemblage of evidence, often lexical in nature, merely associative. Not unexpectedly, many of the text passages are ritual in nature, though a notable feature is that the objects and intentions of the rituals as expressed in the early texts are often not the same as in later texts. In the Ṛgveda, for example, possession was associated with ritual consumption of soma, while in the later Tantras and other explicitly ritual and devotional texts it was associated with initiation, ritual lapses, hostile takeovers by spirits, immersion in the regulated (hence ritualized) “life” of a deity, and the very equivalent of enlightenment. This shift is significant because the relevant passages from most of the later texts as well as occurrences of possession found in modern religious practice, including religious drama, appear to be predicated more explicitly on an ethos of possession that in time became more characteristic, recognizable, and predictable. It is not that the early texts suggest spontaneous states of possession that were later suppressed or domesticated through ritual confinement, but that the earliest accounts may be skewed by frustratingly incomplete descriptions of both ritual and states of possession.[^35]

Regardless of the extent to which early texts may be incomplete or later texts and ethnographic accounts complete, an unchanging fact was that spiritual and social forms of control were to a great extent mediated through intricate ritualizing, in which the domestication of possession was undoubtedly a factor. But this probably came about not because of more possession, or ritualization of possession, but because of increasing recognition of it through a more developed vocabulary of possession. After possession was recognized and named—and this appears to have already occurred by the time of the Ṛgveda—the category or categories denoting this activity became multivocal; they expanded to include varieties or shadings of itself. As is often the case with an action or phenomenon that is inherently uncertain or difficult to identify, possession as experienced and thought about in India suffered the discomfort of certainty and confidence arising from linguistic identification. In other words, one of the methods of controlling possession was to identify it, however vague or variant it might be, as something that was already known. Thus the forms of experience reflected in this vocabulary appeared to require control, given the social and ritual fabric of control in ancient India and the increased tendency to codify such control through the careful use of language and the composition of texts.

[^35]: See Csordas 1994:222ff., 252ff., for discussions on the criteria for spontaneity and control in American Charismatic Catholic trance healing. Spontaneity lies outside the accepted boundaries of intentionality.

Perhaps as important as any other feature inhibiting orthodox recognition of possession was the very fact of literacy itself, which presupposes the composition of Sanskrit texts (not to speak of scholarly exegesis). One might say that in general textuality itself was, or at least epitomized, the antithesis of possession. Walter Ong notes, “By separating the knower from the known, writing makes possible increasingly articulate introspectivity, opening the psyche as never before not only to the external objective world quite distinct from itself but also to the interior self against whom the objective world is set.”[^36] In other words, literacy—or, more simply, text—potentially releases the knower from the necessity of intense bodily engagement, from interaction with other beings, human or nonhuman, real or imagined, and, at the same time, establishes self-sufficiency beyond the pale of relational intrusion, a realm in which possession naturally abides. Indeed, to the culture of the situated word, possession dictated a relational intrusion beyond the realm of self-sufficiency; it was, rather, a technology or mode of representation, an improbable and intractable self-effacement and a wholesale replacement of one set of memories for another.[^37] The response of most of the orthodox among Sanskrit paṇḍitas to the problem of possession, or more generally of human experience itself, was a civilizing and, not incidentally, a benignly controlling neglect, a response not far from that of their more modern Indological counterparts.

[^36]: Ong 1982:105. The literature on orality has advanced considerably in recent years; cf. Falk 1990 and Lopez 1995a, both of which are concerned more with the dynamics of orality and scripture than with the dynamics of culture.

[^37]: See the incisive comments of Morris (2000) on remembering, forgetting, and literacy,

Regardless of whether writing was a universal fact of life among the educated (and in India education did not always require the written word), the brahmanical culture was one in which certain behavioral norms were propagated and largely observed. The very propagation and observance of these norms, regardless of how closely tied they were to written texts (and eventually their link was very close), constituted at least a cultural or brahmanical literacy that became extratextual, though emphatically not universal, as the discipline of anthropology constantly confirms. Indeed, I try to demonstrate, inspired to some extent by Ong, that the ideological literacy of “Sanskritic culture” was not universal, that it was, at various points, strongly under the sway of nonliterate and “vernacular” modes of thought.[^38] While it is probably true that literacy, wittingly or unwittingly, inculcates control, what we find in India is that certain cultures, highly refined (saṃskṛta) yet, at the same time, comfortably “vernacularized,” share certain features that allow considerable spontaneity and emotion, positioning them more or less against the grain of a “Sanskritic culture” commonly understood (or, more accurately, misunderstood) as uniform or monolithic. At the risk of oversimplification, I posit for the moment that the most prominent among these are the early vedic culture and the culture of post–first millennium C.E. bhakti, with the more normative, control-oriented, darśana-based cultures situated between them.

[^38]: See Hufford 1977, indicating an incomplete hypostatization of oral exegesis into the ideologies of literacy; Davidson 2002, on the influence of nonliterate people on Mahāyāna Buddhism; and Campany 1996, esp. ch. 1. Campany writes: “As scholars including Walter Ong, Jack Goody, Michel de Certeau, and Jacques Derrida have shown, writing lends itself to ‘fixing’ objects of discourse by creating a uniform field of textual space and time in which they assume a definite place” (p. 16). Countering this, however, is a “nostalgia for the oral [which] is often part of a larger protest against the sort of locative cosmography for which writing had served as a medium” (ibid.). Although this nostalgia is largely unconscious, it helps explain why possession could not be effectively suppressed among the literate in classical India.


