+++
title = "02 The Sanskritic Vocabulary of Possession"

+++

It is difficult to recommend a single definition of possession, or indeed a single word for it, in the Indian context, primarily because this context—even as described in Sanskrit texts—is more accurately a shifting series of contexts that betray a broad life experience. Kathleen Erndl states, “The word possession can … provide only a rough and partial semantic equivalent for what is a fluid, multifaceted set of concepts.”39 The fact that I am able to locate only one attempt to define possession in Sanskrit literature, by the great tenth-century Kashmiri paṇḍita Abhinavagupta (discussed below), and that this definition does not easily suit most of the Sanskritic contexts of possession, demonstrates that possession as apprehended from these literary contexts constitutes a category in need of clarification. Determining the extent to which such a clarification can be expedited by comparison with the interpretations of possession states proffered by ethnographers is a necessary part of this study. This matter is dealt with below, but here I need simply to mention that comparisons with shamanic ecstasy, yogic samādhi, and hypnotic states must be undertaken cautiously. Mircea Eliade, who many years ago proposed these distinctions in his book Yoga: Immortality and Freedom, has not given adequate attention to possession states in spite of contributing the valuable observation that yogins and fakirs may practice the exercises of particular schools of yoga while separately (or even simultaneously, which is to say eclectically) engaging in “ecstatic practice,”40 which has too often been regarded as synonymous with possession.41 So, without overburdening the reader with taxonomies, at least in the beginning, of what has been regarded in India as spirit or deity possession, I shall try to convey what the ancient and classical texts have said about both the process and the accompanying states of deity and spirit possession.

I began thinking about this topic with the idea that I could do justice to the subject by searching the texts for examples of āveśa (entrance into), the word used perhaps most widely for possession. This derives from the lexeme ā√viś (to enter in) and is attested in the sense of possession in many of its verbal forms and nominal derivatives (including, notably, samāveśa). Forms of ā√viś are nearly always distinguished from its close colleague pra√viś (to enter toward), which provides relevant nominal derivatives such as praveśa and praveśana. In the former case, ā√viś, friendly, benign, or self-motivated possession is indicated, while pra√viś more often indicates possession generated from outside.42 In fact, C. J. Fuller, undoubtedly reflecting on contemporary ethnographic data, comments, “In all Indian languages, a distinction can be made between involuntary, ‘bad’ possession by a malevolent being and voluntary, ‘good’ possession by a deity.”43 Although not all possession induced from outside, which is to say involuntary, can be regarded as “bad” (cf. below the Mahābhārata story of the possession of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava), it is significant that this differentiation appears as early as the Ṛgveda.

Other words for possession occur as well, most frequently derivatives from the root √gṛh (to grasp, seize), e.g., graha, grahaṇa, parigraha, though other derivatives are attested from adhi√sthā (to inhabit) and abhi√mṛś, upa√spṛś, sam√spṛś (to touch, contact). Usually these convey a comparatively malefic sense, an inimical entrance or hostile takeover, in which the possession occurs independent of or even contrary to the intention of the one possessed. However, other more extended ideas or descriptions of emotional states may occur in place of a single word. Most important here is the word bhāva (mood, attitude, experiential state), which is often closely associated semantically with āveśa. Therefore, an examination of this word must be incorporated into a study of āveśa, especially in Purāṇas and other devotional texts, as well as in ethnographies of possession. Indeed, one of the primary aims of this study is to elucidate the vocabulary of possession, to understand the complex semantic parameters of the lexical field relating to possession, recognizing that the Sanskrit (and other Indic) terms, as well as the English term “possession,” are polysemous and multivocal, thus presenting an array of unenviable problems in cross-cultural understanding.44
