+++
title = "03 Problematics of Interpretation"

+++
Until the 1970s it was acceptable literary practice to employ terms such as “person,” “self,” and “experience” unquestioningly in academic discourse. Since then, however, these and other related terms have come under close critical scrutiny. The word “consciousness,” for example, is used in contemporary Anglophone culture in ways never imagined, for instance, in classical India; indeed, I have identified more than thirty different words and terms in one Sanskrit text alone, the Bhāgavata Purāṇa, that have been variously translated with this juggernaut significator of contemporary culture.45 These words and terms have distinct meanings with distinct, if partially overlapping, semantic fields. This confers specificity to each word and term that is not conveyed through the blanket translation “consciousness.” Thus, because of the abuse, confusion, and ambiguity of this word revealed in contemporary discursive practice, I have avoided it whenever possible.46 This is not always practical, however, because possession inevitably touches on issues raised by the concept of consciousness as variously formulated.47

With this example in mind, we should discuss a few problematic English terms that are prominent in the present discussions of possession and that, like “consciousness,” call for greater precision and sensitivity to context. I need not dwell here on the central term of this study, namely “possession,” as I must, obviously, deal with it throughout. But a few others should be highlighted at the outset because of their general relevance. In addition to “consciousness,” we consider here “experience,” “person,” and “self.” These three terms do not come close to exhausting the problematics that could be raised with respect to the terminology employed in this volume; but to discuss them more deeply here would deflect the focus of this work and impose greater restrictions on my own freedom of discourse than is necessary or comfortable. Some of these other terms, such as “rationality,” “incarnation,” “intentionality,” “belief,” and “mediumship,” could also have been mentioned at the outset. But these and several others are better addressed in situ. Several of these terms received dedicated space in Mark C. Taylor’s Critical Terms for Religious Studies,48 which I occasionally cite here. However, I limit my remarks specifically to the subject at hand.49
