+++
title = "04 The Concept of Experience"

+++
When I speak of an experience of soma (Chapter 5), a cultural or religious experience, a personal experience, a dissociative experience, and especially an experience of possession, I am employing with apparent ease terminology that hovers on a precipitous edge of ancient and classical Indian discourse maps. No one can doubt that people as well as cultures and civilizations experience in some sense, and that they experience all the time. Several scholars, however, including Wilhelm Halbfass, Wayne Proudfoot, and Robert Sharf, have noted, or even reinforced, certain relatively recent doubts cast on the “notion” of experience, particularly religious experience, positing that its validity can be situated only within highly specified cultural contexts. Halbfass sorts out the concept in Indian thought, particularly in its encounter with Western models of experience,50 while Sharf, following Proudfoot and others, traces the conceptualization of experience to the German philosopher Arthur Schleiermacher in the early nineteenth century and shows that personal religious experience was not an issue of doctrinal concern in the textuality of Asian religions until the early twentieth century.51 Thus, when I speak of experience in the ways mentioned above, am I injecting into the personal and cultural networks of possession in South Asia an epistemology that threatens to bury the subject beneath fragile and dissembling layers of modern discourse? Am I reading possession in South Asia as a servant of the overwrought contemporary, peculiarly Western, discourse of experience? With such dangers in mind, Sharf resolves to employ the term “experience” guardedly.

I do not eschew the notion of religious experience to the extent Sharf does, thus I do not feel it is necessary to justify its use by attempting to establish an empirical epistemology of it. Sharf pointedly writes:

I have suggested that it is ill conceived to construe the object of the study of religion to be the inner experience of religious practitioners. Scholars of religion are not presented with experiences that stand in need of interpretation but rather with texts, narratives, performances, and so forth. While these representations may at times assume the rhetorical stance of phenomenological description, we are not obliged to accept them as such.52

I do not contest Sharf’s basic point, that we are dealing with texts, narratives, performances, and so forth. In this volume, we are not encountering possession directly, but approaching it through the side door of academics, which is to say through linguistic examination, textual description and prescription, ethnographic reportage, and text-critical, anthropological, psychological, literary, and historical interpretations. Similarly, I agree with Sharf that we are not obliged to accept at face value the phenomenological descriptions of these texts and narratives; but neither can we reject or neglect them out of hand as a methodological stance, replacing them with secure propositions of our own making. The hermeneutic of suspicion on which rests much of value in our fields must not become a hermeneutic of mandatory, routine rejection. At this point, no scholar will disagree that texts, as well as performances or orally produced descriptions, are representations that at best asymptotically approach facticity or are themselves the only realities that they construct.

As for the rhetorical stance that informs my own material, most classical Indian philosophers and theoreticians agree that smṛti (memory), on which representation is constructed, is inadmissible as pramāṇa (means of proof).53 Perhaps for this reason they, like Sharf, shied away from discussions of personal experience, in the present case of possession by spirits, deities, yogins, or other adepts. But perhaps this is also why they questioned the consensus view of their world, and why they do not appear to have denied the ontological possibility of spirits, deities, and possession. While they rejected the final validity of memory and memory-based representation, they readily admitted observation (pratyakṣa) as a valid means of proof. Thus the stance that classical textuality takes with regard to possession approximates that of performance and oral narrative: What you see is what you get, but you might also get what you do not see.

In virtually all the approaches I consider here—textual, anthropological, psychological, and historical—assertions of the inner and individual nature of the experience of possession are stripped away and “the phenomenon” in question is presented as discursively realizable only through reconstruction of context, whether performative or textual. It is with reference to this interpretive tradition that I feel compelled to contribute my own remarks to the discussion on the nature of the experience of possession. In spite of Sharf’s and Halbfass’s observations that personal inner experience is a notion imported to interpretations of Asian religious phenomena by Western and Western-informed scholars and practitioners,54 I contend that the removal of the role of individual inner experience, or subordinating it to a normative context, is another kind of ill-conceived construction of the object of study.
