+++
title = "05 The Person and the Self"

+++
The notion of a “person” distinguished from a “self” was initially, if vaguely, proposed by Marcel Mauss in his final but seminal essay, “Une catégorie de l’esprit humain: la notion de personne, celle de ‘moi,’” written in 1938.55 Since then, philosophers and anthropologists have inquired further into these categories. This distinction is important in problematizing possession, especially in India, where the oppositions person/self share conceptual territory with the indigenous categories puruṣa/puruṣottama and ātman/brahman, and in early Buddhism with the terms attabhāva (Pali < Skt. ātma-bhāva; individuality) and puggala (Pali < Skt. pudgala; person). Consideration of these terms, especially of the paired opposites puruṣa/puruṣottama and ātman/brahman is advisable for establishing the ground on which possession may be understood in Sanskritic discourse. Only through such consideration will it be possible to comprehend the discursive context, for both scholarly and Indic categories, of the question “What or who is possessed?”

Leaving aside Mauss’s evident evolutionism,56 a summary of his concept will prove useful here. Observes Mauss, given “that there has never existed a human being who has not been aware, not only of his body, but also at the same time of his individuality, both spiritual and physical,”57 a “person” (personne) or sense of situated “I” (moi) is as close to a natural human phenomenon as is reasonably possible. After sketchily reviewing the evidence from two North American native cultures (Zuñi and Kwakiutl), Australian aboriginal culture, classical India (in two brief paragraphs),58 China, and Rome, then early Christianity, he proffers several features of personhood: absorption within one’s clan, name and title, hierarchical rank, rights and obligations, roles and functions, and property. In addition to these local accretions and constructions, a person is also a legal category. Thus it is no surprise to learn that the word “person” (Latin persona) indicates a mask—tragic, ritual, or ancestral. The Latin and Greek persons were also moral ones, with “a sense of being conscious, independent, autonomous, free and responsible.”59 If Mauss is correct and this was the case in Europe, it was less so in India, which had more sharply wrought notions of fate, circumscribing this autonomy and freedom. It was Christianity, asserts Mauss, that conferred personhood on the shell or mask or conditional person and provided the person (personne) with a metaphysical foundation, a rational substantiality, indivisible and individual. Although this view was much more nuanced, and not uncontested, in the history of Christian theology, the general trend was to regard the self as an inner, unchanging, stable, and ultimately detachable core known as the soul, and this is what lay at the center of an integrated if not always balanced wholeness constitutive of personhood. It is here that the situation differs so markedly from that of South Asia, where, as seen below, fluidity, divisibility, and penetrability were features of personhood, where dissociation and fragmentation (sometimes called possession) produced an alienness that at least temporarily overshadowed the familiarity of the person and rendered the self Other, and where a metaphysically conceived “self” was often, though far from always, conceptually sedimented within that person.60

Thus a person is made, not born. This construction is not merely conceptual; it possesses a rarefied corporality or concreteness, the building blocks of which are what McKim Marriott calls “coded substances,” the subtle residue of acculturation.61 These accrete through the materialization and legitimation of any of Mauss’s qualities of personhood, by the performance of a particular action or series of actions, or by any other intentional or interactional process. A brahman, for example, becomes a brahman “person” by virtue of an initiation (upanayana), a rite of passage that complicates his identity and individuality by rendering him twice-born (dvija). Similarly, a śūdra becomes a śūdra person not just through the passive act of birth into a particular family, but through his or her occupation, expectations, low ritual rank, and relation with non-śūdras. Personhood, then, according to various modern Western-derived schools of cultural critique, consists of a collocation of contextual substantialities with a locus on a physically demarcated individual.

Selfhood, by contrast, is more internally realized, a personal objectification of one’s own subjectivity. A recursivity may be seen in the relation of person and self: While personhood is an objectification and representation of selfhood, it nevertheless illumines and engages this selfhood, the definitions and boundaries of which the “person” has set. This, then, sets in motion a reciprocal process of the self producing, engaging, and placing limits on the person. But the person, closer to the world and its vicissitudes than the self, is more easily subjected than the self to shifts and modalities of objectification; indeed, in its engagement with the person, it would be pointless and contradictory to assert that the self objectifies the person, even as it engages it. Thomas Csordas, citing Merleau-Ponty, states the critical view succinctly, a view that is at odds with traditional Indic views: “The person already objectified is a culturally constituted representation of the self. The preobjective self, however, is a culturally constituted mode of being in the world.”62 It is the status of this “preobjective self” that most Indic schools of thought would dispute. Stated in these terms, we might say that the culturally constituted Indic notion of selfhood is of a self that is not culturally constructed; it is of a preobjective self that is free of cultural constructions of the world. In sum, it is helpful in the present study to be aware of how contemporary Western-derived models of cultural critique contend that person and self are culturally constructed and constitute each other, whereas non-Buddhist Indic systems tend to preserve a one-way process of self as prior to person.

In his article “Person,” in Critical Terms for Religious Studies, Charles E. Winquist traces the changes in the concept of the person in Western philosophy as it progressed from philosophies of being to philosophies of consciousness to philosophies of language. “The subject experienced in the transcendental unity of apperception, which is itself an effect of differential series of active formal processes, can then be asserted as the basic meaning of the person in an epistemological construct.”63 In other words, depending on the immediate and ever-shifting coloring of perception conferred by local context, a person is the sum total and unified representation of all autonomic and conceptual systems operating within an individual. This, it appears, is a philosophical iteration of Marriott’s sociological notion of substance-codes: The individual is systemic, with a collocation and hierarchy of autonomic, ethical, perceptual, and conceptual systems. When taken together in a dynamic and shifting unity, they constantly produce usable knowledge. When these factors combine in a uniquely situated and usually culturally validated manner to produce an epistemic shift of sufficient quality, a self may be represented. From the emic perspective, this self is produced within, and is sometimes distinct from, the person. This self, at least as it is expressed in Indic thought in the concept of ātman, is a metaphysical residue of the person that operates in an inherently reflexive manner.64 Through ascribing to it reflexivity, freedom, and autonomy, it is thus constituted as Other, while its counterpart, the person, contains within itself antinomies that, if separated from the whole, constitute a differently conceived otherness, an otherness that does not contribute to selfhood but expresses fragmentation of personhood. Similarly, Marriott’s notion of substance-code expresses these antinomies, as well as juxtapositions, overlaps, and possible fragmentations of the parts of the person.

The distinction I am attempting to forge between person and self in terms of the two sets of Sanskritic categorical oppositions puruṣa/puruṣottama and ātman/brahman can at best be partial and tentative. Given the widely divergent intellectual histories of these English and Sanskrit lexemes, it is foolish to assert exact equivalences. puruṣa literally means “man” or “person,” while puruṣottama is translated as “highest person” and usually refers to Kṛṣṇa. puruṣottama is, in fact, one of the most prominent names for Kṛṣṇa in both the Mahābhārata and the Bhāgavata Purāṇa. puruṣa as “person” is rarely used in the sense of “a free and autonomous self devoid of definable qualities and behavioral environment.” The only place this meaning is preserved is in Sāṃkhya and Yoga philosophy, where the singularity or multiplicity of puruṣa, which Gerald Larson renders in its philosophical sense with the dangerous terms “consciousness” and “contentless consciousness,” has been much debated.65 In most narrative contexts in Sanskrit, puruṣa is assumed to possess forms and qualities. This is exemplified in the person of Kṛṣṇa, the highest person, who contains within himself all forms (rūpa) and attributes (guṇa), the entire spectrum of materiality (prakṛti) as well as universal selfhood, brahman or akṣarabrahman. Personhood in the Indian sense, then, is a manifestation of form, attribute, substance, and materiality.

The opposition puruṣa/puruṣottama may be contrasted with ātman/ brahman in that ātman refers to a certain residue of the person, a “thumb-sized person” (aṅguṣṭhamātrapuruṣaḥ) residing in the heart, according to the Upaniṣads,66 which, though dependent on a body or person, is separate from substance and substantiality. It is free and autonomous, an inseparable microcosmic component of the absolute macrocosmic brahman. More precisely, in its generalized vedic sense, where it underwent considerable semantic development, ātman signified “the center of a personality determining its individuality” or “the substratum underlying the phenomena and functions of life,” in the words of Jan Gonda.67 Conversely, brahman’s microcosm is ātman, the self or identifiable center of personality. It is not puruṣa, a person with many parts and systems but no definitive or consensus ontological center. Furthermore, according to the devotional schools of Indian thought that gained prominence early in the second millennium C.E. and figure significantly in our discussions of possession (cf. Chapter 9 on bhakti), although all puruṣa are engulfed within the puruṣottama, they can never become that puruṣottama. Nor can they ever fully identify themselves as that puruṣottama, as ātman can with brahman.

Buddhist texts, as Steven Collins clarifies in his providentially titled book Selfless Persons, distinguish between “individuality” (attabhāva) and “person” or character type (puggala). While other Indic texts, particularly within the vast medical literature, engage in protracted discussion of personality or character types subsumed within the rhetoric of demonology (see Chapter 12), early Buddhist texts, which preceded the extant medical literature, speak of an attabhāva, a uniquely composed and constantly mutating edifice of khandas (Pali < Skt. skandha) or constituents of personality, and puggala, character types defined by temperament, ethical disposition, spiritual aptitude, and so on. Both attabhāva and puggala are driven by kamma (Pali < Skt. karman), the sum-total of sense-desires, feelings, and perceptions. It is these that produce individuality, the internal sense of self, and character type, the person observed from without. Collins states: “Where attabhāva was more oriented towards expressing, in a suitably impersonal way, the structure of individuals and rebirth as particular forms of existence, puggala is more oriented toward description of those individuals and reborn ‘persons’ as character-types.”68 Both of these are, according to Buddhist doctrine, void of reality; attabhāva, the status, condition, or experience of selfhood is no proof or guarantee of an ontological self. And it is this empty set that serves as the basis for puggalas or observed character types, rendering the latter equally baseless and empty. Given this status, the Buddhist individual becomes inconstant and permeable, capable of penetration, displacement, or permeation by forces, moods, entities, or beings of different but equally empty constitution.69

Because of possession’s complexity—āveśa, praveśa, or any other variety of it—we might say that it directly engages and affects the person, the puruṣa (though no Sanskrit text speaks of it in quite this way) or attabhāva. Possession may in certain cases, for example in initiatory possession described in tantric texts, help illumine a self, but it occurs within and is mediated by complex systemic units that we might call persons or puruṣa. Thus I am careful to keep discussion of possession within the domain of personhood, with the cultural and behavioral environments that these perforce require and refer to emergent selfhood when the context dictates. This is not only because it makes good English sense, but because it makes good Sanskrit and Indic sense.
