+++
title = "04 IDEAL DEVOTEE AND INTERMEDIARY"

+++

After Vālmikī’s *Rāmāyaṇa,* Rāma increasingly ascended to a position of supreme deity for many Hindus. Today in India he is one of the most popular deities and is the recipient of fervent devotion from millions of devotees. The shift in Rāma’s status from that of a human hero or incarnation of Viṣṇu in Vālmikī’s *Rāmāyaṇa* to that of the lord of the worlds is evident in the sixteenth-century Hindi work of Tulsī Dās, the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* an extremely popular devotional work in North India. Although the central narrative remains the same, even in most particulars, Tulsī Dās frequently alters the story in such a way that opportunities are afforded to express devotion to Rāma as the Lord. Throughout the text it is clear that the central point of the narrative is Rāma’s descent to the earth in order to provide his devotees a chance to worship him.35

In the process of Rāma’s elevation to divine supremacy, Sītā also underwent certain changes. Her status becomes similarly elevated when Rāma becomes identified with the highest god. In his poem *Kavitāvalī* Tulsī Dās refers to Sītā as the world’s mother and to Rāma as the world’s father \(1.15\).36 Elsewhere in the poem Rāma and Sītā are praised in fervent, devotional language by village women who see them walking along the road. The two are compared to various divine couples, and the very sight of them has redemptive effects \(2.14–25; 7.36\). In another of Tulsī Dās’s works Rāma and Sītā are worshiped and addressed in devotional tones: “My mind now tells me that save for Rāma’s and Sītā’s feet I shall go nowhere else.”37 In his invocation to his *Rāmcarit-mānas* Tulsī Dās invokes several deities and includes this verse to Sītā: “Hail to Rāma’s own beloved Sita, victor o’er all suff’ring, / Mistress of birth, life, death, and of all happiness the giver.”38 In the popular folk dramas of North India, the Rām Līlās, in which whole villages act out the story of Rāma over the course of several weeks, the actors playing the roles of Rāma and Sītā are worshiped by the spectators as deities.39

Consistent with her role in Vālmīki’s *Rāmāyaṇa* as the ideal wife who subordinates herself to her husband, Sītā never achieves the position of a great, powerful, independent deity. Even compared to such goddesses as Lakṣmī and Pārvatī, who in most respects are portrayed as ideal wives in Hindu mythology, Sītā lacks an identity, power, and will of her own. She remains in Rāma’s shadow to such an extent that she is often hardly visible at all. Sītā is rarely mentioned in such devotional works as Tulsī Dās’s *Kavitāvalī* and *Vinaya-patrikā.* Hanuman and Lakṣmaṇa, in fact, are mentioned more often than she is. And when Rāma’s consort is specified, Tulsī Dās often prefers to identify her as Lakṣmī, not as Sītā.40 In fact, Tulsī Dās expresses devotion more often to Pārvatī and Gaṇgā as goddesses than he does to Sītā.41

In popular Hinduism today Sīta is revered as a deity, and in the numerous Rām Līlā performances throughout the Hindi-speaking area of North India the actor who plays Sītā \(all actors are males\) is worshiped as a deity. But Sītā is rarely worshiped in her own right. It would be very unusual to find a temple dedicated to Sītā alone. In Rāma and Hanuman temples an image of Sītā is installed alongside or between Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa, where she receives worship along with her husband and brother-in-law. Though she is honored along with Rāma, it is understood that she is not his equal.

If Sītā does not assume the role of a popular, powerful goddess more or less equal to her husband Rāma, she does play two important roles in the context of devotion to Rāma: the role of intermediary and the role of ideal devotee. Addressing her as world mother, Tulsī Dās petitions Sītā to act as his advocate before Rāma.42 She is not approached directly for divine blessing but as one who has access to Rāma, who alone dispenses divine grace. Again, consistent with her subordinate position vis-à-vis Rāma in the *Rāmāyaṇa,* consistent with her role as one who always subordinates her will to his, Sītā here acts primarily as a messenger between Rāma and his devotees. In her loyalty and devotion she has gained the Lord’s ear, and because of this she is sometimes approached by his devotees for help in seeking Rāma’s favor.

Sītā also assumes the role of devotee in the later Rāma cult and thus assumes a place as model to Rāma’s devotees. Although Hanuman is the most popular model of Rāma devotion in the later Rāma cults, Sītā is often pictured as an ardent devotee. In the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* for example, she is typically pictured as intoxicated by the appearance of Rāma and steadfastly devoted to him. Indeed, in the *Rāmcarit-mānas* Tulsī Dās has sometimes altered the narrative in such a way as to emphasize Sītā’s devotion and love for Rāma. For example, in the Vālmikī *Rāmāyaṇa* Sītā pleads to accompany Rāma to the forest by appealing to law and custom. She argues that a wife’s duty is to be with her husband. In the *Rāmcarit-mānas,* however, Rāma and others argue that religious custom and law dictate that she should stay behind and take care of her in-laws. Backing up these arguments are other reasons why she should stay behind, including the argument that someone as delicate as STta could not endure the difficulties of the forest life. Sītā’s reply does not dwell on the social norm that a wife always be with her husband, as in the Vālmīki *Rāmāyaṇa,* but on the unbearable agony that separation from her husband will inflict. It is not her sense of duty but her love for and devotion to Rāma which give Sītā’s plea its force and passion in the *Rāmcarit-mānas.43*

Sītā’s role as devotee, like her role as intermediary, casts her in a subsidiary positon vis-à-vis Rāma. He is the supreme deity, the object of devotion; she is the ideal devotee, the model for the human devotee. Wifely devotion has here become a metaphor for ideal devotion to God.



