+++
title = "02 THE GOPĪ TRADITION"

+++

Another historical thread is important in understanding Rādhā’s central role in Jayadeva’s writing and in the later devotional movements of North India. This is the mythological tradition surrounding Kṛṣṇa’s sojourn in Vraja and his dalliance there with the *gopīs,* the cowherd women of the village. This tradition dates back to the *Harivaṁśa* \(ca. A.D. 500\) and is a central part of most later Vaiṣṇava *Purānas.* The most popular and detailed rendering of the tradition prior to Jayadeva is found in the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa,* written in South India sometime during the tenth century.8 According to this mythological tradition, Kṛṣṇa’s father spirits him away from Mathurā, where he was born, to escape the threat of his murderous uncle, Kaṁsa. Kṛṣṇa’s father leaves the infant in the home of Nanda and Yaśodā, a cowherd couple, who raise the child as their own in the village of Vraja. On reaching maturity Kṛṣṇa leaves Vraja, returns to Mathurā, and slays Kaṁsa. According to early renditions of this tradition, Kṛṣṇa is an incarnation of Viṣṇu, and the purpose of his incarnation as Kṛṣṇa is to slay Kaṁsa, who is oppressing the earth with his wickedness. The primary focus of the narrative in the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa,* however, and the central interest of the later devotional traditions in North India, is Kṛṣṇa’s sojourn in Vraja, where he sports with his young companions and, on reaching adolescence, dallies with the women of the village.

The village women dote on Kṛṣṇa as a child. They tolerate and are often amused by his pranks. But their interest in him changes to passionate longing when he grows older. They are all married women, but none is able to resist Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and charm. He is described as retiring to the woods, where he plays his flute on autumn nights when the moon is full. Hearing the music, the women are driven mad with passion and give up their domestic roles and chores to dash away to be with Kṛṣṇa in the bowers of Vṛndāvana. They jump up in the middle of putting on their makeup, abandon their families while eating a meal with them, leave food to burn on the stove, and run out of their homes to be with Kṛṣṇa. They are so distraught and frenzied as they rush to his side that their clothes and jewelry come loose and fall off \(10.29.3–7\).

In the woods the *gopīs* sport and play with Kṛṣṇa. They make love in the forest and in the waters of the Jumna River. In some accounts of the tradition Kṛṣṇa is said to multiply himself so that each woman has a Kṛṣṇa to herself. The mood is joyous, festive, and erotic. The text makes no attempt to deny the impropriety of the *gopīs* leaving their husbands and abandoning their social responsibilities in order to make love to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa even teases some of the women for behaving illicitly \(10.29.26–27\).

No mention is made of Rādhā in any of these early accounts of the *gopī* tradition. The *gopīs,* in fact, are not mentioned by name but are usually treated as a group. In general, Kṛṣṇa is portrayed as sporting with many women at once. The *Bhāgavata-purāṇa* mentions a favorite *gopī.* Kṛṣṇa goes off with her alone, but when she begins to feel proud of herself for being singled out by Kṛṣṇa and asks him to carry her, he disappears, reducing her to tears and remorse \(10.30.35–38\). The lesson seems clear: Kṛṣṇa’s love is not exclusive. He loves all the cowherd women and encourages them all to love him in return.

The role of the cowherd women in the context of devotion is made fairly clear in the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa* itself. The nature of true devotion, the text says, is highly emotional and causes horripilation, tears, loss of control, and frenzy \(11.14.23–24\). Those who love the Lord truly behave like the *gopīs.* They let nothing come between themselves and the Lord. When they hear his call they abandon everything to be with him. Even though they are married and have household duties to attend to, even though they incur the censure of society, they rush off to be with Kṛṣṇa when they hear his call. So too should the ardent devotee behave in loving Kṛṣṇa. In their disregard for normal social roles, in their extreme emotion and frenzy, the *gopīs* serve as an appropriate metaphor for the divine-human love affair. Rādhā, as we shall see, inherits this role in the later devotional movements, particularly in Bengal.
