+++
title = "01 Culture, Fiction, and Possession"

+++
In the present study we examine possession as a descriptor for a kind or class of mood, as a mechanism of divine creation, as a possible consequence of the consumption of soma, as a factor in disease production, as part of the job description of the gandharva and other semidivine beings, as ordnance in the arsenal of accomplished yogins, and as a mode of devotion. What sets these portrayals apart from representations of possession in texts we examine here is that they were assumed by the authors of the various genres we have examined so far (Vedas, Purāṇas, Sanskrit epics, Yoga texts, Tantras, medical literature, and so on) to abide in a kind of facticity based on the interplay of myth, historical event, discourse mode, and didactic intent. This presumption held its ground even when the possession episodes in question were knowingly and unabashedly embellished as part of a literary enterprise. To cite two examples, the hagiographical rendering of Śaṅkara’s possession was lifted almost entirely from earlier fictional tales, as was the story of the possession by darkness of King Purañjana.

What we examine here are a few explicitly fictional works that make little attempt to adorn themselves with either piety or excessive devotion to normative dharma; in other words, the fictional material presented in this chapter has not been appropriated as either fact or normative discourse by other genres. Afterward, we inquire into the aesthetics of possession, a subject that periodically occupies the remaining chapters.

Because of the energy and authority invested in its Sanskritic presentation, itself based on accumulated cultural memory (reinforced by a dynamic system of mnemonics), the assumption of possession as an existential possibility was never questioned or debated, at least outside Mahāyāna Buddhist medical treatises in which “demons” were viewed as manifestations of mental afflictions and karma, thus reducing their ontological status to that of illusion.1 In ethnographies as well as in most of the texts we have examined, the debate, where it is found, has been over authenticity: Is observed possession genuine or feigned? In the absence of data on direct visual experience of spirits, deities, or subtle bodies of yogins entering others’ bodies, the parameters of the debates have concerned the reliability and veracity of the reportage, the suitability of the overall context for possession, and the evaluation by the audience of the quality of the observed possession experience. The audience might consist of an individual or group witnessing the possession event, as attested in such diverse settings as the Upaniṣads and modern South Indian Draupadī cult ritual. In these settings, the individual becomes an alien party to his or her own possession or, more germane to the present discussion of aesthetics, a reader of or listener to a story. I maintain these categories of observer or observer/participant because they are valid within the broad panorama of Indic culture. All three of these barometers of reliability—veracity, context, and quality—are elastic and have been expanded (or contracted) through time, community or regional variation, and the innovations of retelling.

In what we have discussed thus far, little attention has been paid to the reception of possession in premodern public culture, though in our brief discussion of possession and trance channeling we can perhaps sense a suggestion of this. In any event, that changes here. What we address in this chapter is possession as it appears in works of fiction, as part of the Indian imaginaire. This is important because this genre has been instrumental in setting the ontological and soteriological tone for other literary genres. These texts measure cultural consensus in ways that philosophical, prescriptive, or scientific literature cannot. Indic fiction—which includes drama (nāṭaka), collections of didactic tales (such as the Kathāsaritsāgara [KSS], Bṛhatkathā, Pañcatantra, Hitopadeśa, Prabandhacintāmaṇi), and the variegated genres of epic poetry (kāvya) and novels (e.g., the Kādambarī and the Daśakumāracarita)—was not meant to be read literally, historically, or paradigmatically. It may also be argued that the two Sanskrit epics, the Purāṇas, and the truth-bearing tales from the Upaniṣads fall in the genre of fiction. However, for our purposes we classify them elsewhere. The “truth” in some of these genres (nāṭaka, kāvya) lies in their significance and evocation, in the quality and emotional clarity of their reception.

The motifs of Indic fiction are often drawn from the Sanskrit epics and the Purāṇas, which contain good, even riveting, stories that are strongly redolent of fiction to many modern readers,2 but were, on the whole, taken literally in ancient and classical Indian public culture. It is these works that subsequently germinated and nourished the public imagination and its concurrent social reality. These contributed to further reports of possession, of a literature that grew out of these texts, and a subsequent prescriptive literature that inevitably accompanied them. Descriptive and prescriptive texts feed off and build on each other, becoming cyclical and self-generating. Among their more playful offspring are classical epics and fiction, which include or reflect both narrative and prescriptive normativity. In this way, notice of possession in the Mahābhārata (MBh), the KSS, and other texts, some of which we discuss here, had the force of becoming, as Rosalind Morris states in her discussions of possession in Thailand, “the fictions that mediums themselves inhabit.”3

One may compare the 1971 American novel The Exorcist, by William Peter Blatty, and the 1973 film of the same name adapted from it as examples in which fictionalized possession had deep repercussions in popular culture.4 Blatty wrote a fictional and highly sensationalized account of exorcisms that occurred in Washington state and St. Louis in 1949. Some of the behavior of Blatty’s characters, such as fits of vomiting, which he created to sensationalistic effect, were then replicated (and theologically explained) in exorcisms conducted by both the Catholic Church and evangelical Protestant ministries. For many years, a popular kind of religious therapy consisted of repeated engagement in cathartic exorcisms, as the reigning priesthoods did little to discourage their flocks from believing in their diabolical possession. By venturing such a comparison, I am not arguing that first-millennium Indian poets and playwrights commodified possession in the way that one might observe in certain Christian evangelical denominations today; rather, I am arguing against the positions of Morris and Lambek that possession by alleged entities of one description or another, based at least in part on fictional accounts, are themselves entirely fictive.

Belief and the power of myth objectify and energize the objects of such belief and place them in a different relationship to the agent of the belief than is the case with the casual reader of a novel or the casual viewer of a film. The power of effective fiction or drama is its ability to gain the confidence of its audience, which is to say its affective power. The Indian discipline of aesthetic theory (alaṃkāraśāstra) is, in fact, constructed around notions of audience response; it engages literary and dramatic works in terms of their ability to cultivate in the audience specific emotions (bhāva) and moods (rasa). We discuss a specific case of this in Chapter 9: the connection between aesthetic appreciation and devotional possession. Although the textuality of the Bhāgavata Purāṇa or any one of a number of ornate poetical works aims to cultivate the mood of divine possession through the power and sweetness of its expression and imagery, texts that are more accessible (which is to say less sectarian), such as the MBh and KSS, are also designed to capture the imagination of their audiences. The composers of various renditions of the tales of King Vikrama and the vampire had no intention of evangelizing an audience about the facticity of the events of Vikrama’s kingship or the ontological reality of the vampire, yet they must have been aware of both their contributions to the imaginaire, bringing this aspect of Sanskrit fiction to specialized and often vernacular audiences, and the limits of their project, didactic entertainment without an undercurrent of soteriological preaching. Nevertheless, such didacticism was not without its religious background. It is in the concomitance of fiction and the religious imagination, reflected in the literary descriptions of religious and social culture, that we can ascribe a kind of substantiality to possession and to spirits, at least within the topos of Marriott’s notion of substance codes. The question to be considered here is not whether these substantialities possess mass, form, and intent of their own. Rather, the preeminent issue is of representation: How has the cycle of genre, belief, and experience functioned to further constitute possession in South Asia? The following discussions are intended to enable us to cautiously approach an answer to this question.
