+++
title = "02 Possession in Sanskrit Fiction"

+++
Possession, especially of the dead, was a particularly lively motif in Sanskrit and other Indic fiction. This was discussed at length by Maurice Bloomfield, who noted in 1917 that possessing another’s body “is an art destined to make a brilliant career in fiction.”5 Bloomfield, however, examined possession solely as a literary curiosity, not as a cultural phenomenon. In his study, Bloomfield summarized tales from the MBh, the KSS, including its lengthy cycle called Vetālapañcaviṃśati or the twenty-five tales of King Vikrama and a certain testy vampire (vetāla), and a few Jain texts, including the Pārśvanātha Caritra and Merutuṇga’s Prabandhacintāmaṇi (Wishing Stone of Narratives). His texts adopt familiar themes: a person or semidivine being like a yakṣa enters the body of another for the sake of personal gain, to protect the possessed individual, to learn a secret art, or to revive a deceased loved one. Some of these themes have already been observed in the MBh. The process of taking possession resembles that described in the Yogasūtras (YS) and its allied literature: forced, and usually stealthy, entry. The term attested most frequently is parakāyapraveśa, synonymous with the YS’s para śarīrāveśaḥ, terms consistent with our general observation that externally induced possession is recorded by forms of the verb pra√viś (the YS use of āveśaḥ demonstrates that this is not always the case). Unlike what we find in the hagiographies and yoga texts, rarely in fiction is spiritual or religious benefit suggested as a motive for possession except as it might coincide with personal gain. Instead, what is most prominent are tales in which animals are possessed either out of necessity, as when King Vikrama is exiled into the body of an elephant after his own body has been taken over by a brahman, or to gain access to secrets, as when various individuals enter the bodies of parrots, with their innate ability to mimic human speech.

Perhaps the most paradigmatic example of this is the recurrent tale of King Vikramāditya and a series of possessions, which both reprises and shadows many other possession accounts we have already explored, including the tale of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci in the MBh and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka. Bloomfield devotes most of his study to investigating the textuality of the Vikramāditya tale, providing a delightful translation of its rendition in the Pārsvanātha Caritra. It must suffice here to note three principal emphases of the story: the manner in which the king learns the secret art of possession (parapurapraveśavidyā), the teachings of dharma that emerge from the mouth of the possessed, and the depiction of possession sequentially so that no other body remains without a jīva or independent conscious being. A further example of the latter, a common theme in tales of possession, occurs in the Prabandhacintāmaṇi. Bloomfield cites Tawney’s translation of this text, in which the yogin Bhairavānanda relates to King Vikrama an account of the transposition of jīvas:



The king, while the Brahman kept guard, entered by his science the body of his elephant;  
The Brahman entered the body of the king; then the king became a pet parrot;  
The king transferred himself into the body of a lizard; then considering that the queen was likely to die,  
The Brahman restored to life the parrot, and great king Vikrama recovered his own body.6

The value of these stories as pure entertainment should not be underestimated. The themes involved, including possession, surely affected the audience differently than did similar stories found in the MBh or various Purāṇas, where the entertainment was both colored and deepened by its link with the archetypes that the listeners’ lives were in many ways modeled after. Hence, the “truth” of the series of possessions related to King Vikrama by Bhairavānanda was of a different order from that of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, of the dead king Amaruka by Śaṇkarācārya, or of the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya by a gandharva. In the latter examples, the flow was understood to be from life experience to story rather than the other way around. But the direction of flow perhaps does not much matter in its effect on an audience, as evidence from literature and film, for example, The Exorcist or the recent Hindi film Bhoot (2003), testifies.

To employ another example, let us momentarily consider Henry James’s dark 1898 novella, The Turn of the Screw, a spooky tale in which children become possessed, arguably the most influential work of its kind in Western literature. Edward Parkinson, in his dissertation on the subject, details its thematic ancestry in nineteenth-century spiritualism and its influence beyond Anglophone literary culture. Like The Exorcist, The Turn of the Screw was not written in a vacuum, as a literary work unconnected with contemporary cultural phenomena. In both these cases, as in Indian history, vectors of literary ancestry and influence are difficult to determine, as personal experience, paradigm, and fiction flow into and out of one another with stunning ease.7 One can argue that the construction of an image and its subsequent interpretation or conversely an experience based on a previously inscribed image and its subsequent refashioning as a further incarnation of that image, ad infinitum, is mere representation. The argument runs that any such sequence, incontestably normal in the world, renders any experience, even (or particularly) one deeply felt and articulately expressed, as a representation, a decaying or vanishing, that advances through an unsuccessfully wrought urge to maintain or precisely replicate itself. In this way, all experiences may be said to be mutating shadows of previous forms; they are, in other words, unstable images or representations.8 This is not thoroughly life-denying; indeed, they can still retain integrity, spontaneity and authenticity. As with a living being, its growth, thought patterns, and power mutate from infancy to adulthood to death, yet are fully formed at every moment. The fact of its mutability, however, renders its fullness unstable, an ever-vanishing incarnation of prior moments, prior images. It is, thus, a mere representation of asymptotic or ever-converging phenomena that never quite meet, its quality as representation defined by the character of its disappearance, by its solitary and uniquely defined presence in and as memory.9 Nevertheless, reducing any experience, including its authenticity, to ephemeral representation in this way also nullifies its virtue, which in the case of possession or any other intimate practice abjures the personal and altruistic value that lies at the center of the experience as practice (or, in the case of possession, even as disease). Let us see now how these themes play out in a few Indian fictional texts.
