+++
title = "03 The Vetālapañcaviṃśati"

+++
The obvious place to begin is the Vetālapañcaviṃśati, probably the best-known example of possession in Hindu fiction (I exclude the MBh from this category). I can hardly do better than to quote Asko Parpola’s lengthy summary of the frame story of this cycle:

The hero is a brave king called Vikramāditya, the “sun of valour,” or (in Somadeva’s version) Trivikramasena. A mendicant (bhikṣu, śramaṇa) called Kṣāntiśīla donates a fruit every day to the king, who without further ado gives them to his treasurer. Ten years pass until accidentally it is found out that each fruit contains a precious jewel. The king asks the mendicant why he is giving these presents, and the mendicant replies that he needs the help of a hero in a magic ritual. The king immediately promises his help, and the mendicant asks him to come to a big cemetery (smasāna) on the fourteenth night of the dark half of the month. The mendicant would be waiting there beneath a banyan tree (vaṭa).

The king does so, wraps himself in a dark blue cloak, takes his sword, and comes to the terrible cemetery full of human skeletons and skulls and teeming with ghosts, dimly lit by funeral pyres, and finds the mendicant drawing a magic circle (maṇḍala) beneath the banyan tree. He asks the king to fetch the dead body of a man that is hanging from a sissoo [śiṃśapa] tree at some distance to the south. The king agrees, and finds the corpse hanging from a tree, smelling of raw flesh and burnt by the flames of funeral pyres. The king climbs the tree and lets the dead body fall down with the rope (by which it was hung) cut. Falling on the ground, the corpse makes a cry. Suspecting the body to be still alive, the king out of pity starts to stroke it, but then the body bursts into a loud laughter, from which the king understands it to be a vampire. When he says, “Why do you laugh? Let’s go!” the corpse flies back to the tree. With much trouble the king again climbs the tree and fetches the body, puts it on his shoulder and keeping silent, starts taking it to the banyan tree.

Now the vampire tells a story to entertain the king on the road. The story ends in a riddling question, and the vampire threatens the king that if he knows the answer and does not say it, then his head will burst asunder into a hundred pieces. The king replies to the query, but when he breaks the silence, the body flies back to the tree again. The same thing happens over and over again, until the vampire asks such a question that the king cannot answer and therefore goes on in silence. Now the vampire declares to the king that he is satisfied with his courage, determination and smart replies, reveals the real intention of the mendicant, and advises the king how to deal with him.

The king arrives at the banyan tree and sees that the mendicant has smeared the ground with blood and drawn a magic circle on it with white powder made of ground human bone, placed a pot filled with blood at each of the cardinal directions around it, and nearby a sacrificial fire flames high from rich libations of the “great oil” (made of the fat of human victims), while all the sacrificial implements are collected in readiness for worshipping the mendicant’s chosen divinity. The mendicant is overjoyed at the king’s arrival and takes the dead body down from his shoulder, bathes it, binds a garland (around its neck), places the corpse inside the circle, applies sacred ashes on his own limbs, puts on a sacrificial thread made of human hair, puts on the funeral clothes of a dead person, meditates a moment, and with the power of mantras makes the vampire enter into the corpse. Then he worships the vampire by offering it guest water from a human skull with carefully cleaned human teeth (as his offering ladles), then gives flowers, incense and ointment, fumigates with human eyes, and makes a bali offering with pieces of (human) flesh. Then he asks the king to prostrate himself on the ground so that eight parts of his body will touch the earth, in adoration of the overlord of spells who is present, so that the deity will be pleased to give as a boon the success that the mendicant has been praying for the king.

The king, following the advice given by the vampire, replies that he does not know how the prostration is to be done, and asks the mendicant to show him first. When the mendicant prostrates himself, the king chops his head off with a strike of his sword. He also pulls out the heart-lotus (hṛt-padma) that he has torn from the mendicant’s stomach, and gives the head and the heart lotus to the vampire. While pleased hosts of ghosts applaud, the satisfied vampire says to the king from the corpse: “the overlordship of the (deities called) ‘wisdom carriers’ (vidyādhara) coveted by this mendicant will be yours at the end of your enjoyment of your imperial rule on the earth. As you have been troubled by me, please choose as a boon whatever you wish.” The king asks for the stories told by the vampire to be told and held in honour on the earth. The vampire grants the wish, saying that whoever tells or hears even one verse of these stories with respect, will be released from sin and obtain immunity from all sorts of demons and ghosts, including Yakṣas, Vetālas, Kūṣmāṇḍas, Ḍākinīs, and Rākṣasas.10

The mendicant’s name, Kṣāntiśīla, and the reference to him as a śramaṇa indicate that he is a Buddhist. This ascription of unusual or magical powers to Buddhist mendicants is consistent with what appears in the earlier Bhagavadajjuka, discussed below. Thus, the attribution of skill in performing esoteric ritual to Buddhist mendicants must have been fairly common in the first millennium C.E. Although this depiction may have elements of the pot calling the kettle black, of brahmans hurling accusations of decadence or debauchery at Buddhists, this depiction appears in popular literature not only in South Asia but in Tibet and China as well. This fragment of classical ethnography supports the assertions of Ronald Davidson that popular, even tribal, practices were incorporated into Mahāyāna Buddhism in the mid- to late first millennium (see Chapter 11) and that they were easily thematized in popular fiction.

The transformation of the inside of a fruit into a precious gem after ten years suggests knowledge of alchemical processes. That the mendicant was drawing a maṇḍala with blood and ground human bone beneath a tree, and probably arranged to have the unidentified corpse hung from a tree some distance to the south (the realm of Yama), also indicate that the mendicant was learned in dark, probably tantric, ritual.11

The ritual self-identification with the dead—the sacred thread of human hair that was probably that of the victim, the donning of the clothes of the deceased, the offering of guest water (arghya) from a carefully cleansed human skull, and so on—conspired to create a general atmosphere of possession and enlivenment of the corpse; and as if on cue it obliged. This, we must remember, is fiction, so we must expect such excesses; these and other symmetries and synchronicities are the stuff of fiction. The main object of the ritual, to please a deity to the point that it granted a boon, was also consistent with most tantric possession. In the end the king emerges victorious over the mendicant, which indicates another stroke (indeed, a beheading) in the eternal battle between political and religious power. The head, the locus of narration, and the heart lotus, the seat of consciousness, satisfy the vetāla, who guarantees that with the assistance of a vidyādhara, a “wisdom-bearer” captured as part of the boon, the narration will continue for the benefit, even the enlightenment, of all beings who hear it. This is a standard Indian coda, tantric and non-tantric; that it should be repeated in the context of a narrative of possession and horror probably served to validate these practices in the mind of the listener. It is this validation or legitimation within the public imagination that was instrumental in the continuity of these tales in innumerable variations over countless centuries and generations.

Let us examine one story from a variation on this collection, this time from Jambhaladatta’s later version of the Vetālapañcaviṃśati.

Then as the goblin [vetāla] was being carried along again, he told another story:

Your majesty, in the land of Kaliṇga there was a city named Yajñasthala. There dwelt a brahman called Yajñasoma. His wife was Somadattā. She bore to him a son named Brahmasvāmin. Though he understood the truth of all sciences [sarvaśāstratattvajñaḥ], through the power of fate [daivavaśāt] he died. His parents, lamenting much, with their kinsfolk took him and went to the charnel grounds [smasāna] to perform the last rites. At that time an ascetic dwelling there saw that the body was that of a brahman’s son skilled in all the sciences and handsome, who had met an unseasonable death [ayuktakālemaraṇam]. He lamented aloud in a mournful voice and then danced with the greatest gaiety. Immediately he arose and through the power of yoga abandoned his old body and entered [praviveśa] the body of the dead brahman youth. The boy was as if he had arisen from sleep. His parents felt great joy. The whole party of kinsfolk rejoiced. Brahmasvāmin, when he had regained life, abandoned all pleasures and continually practiced meditation [yogaṃ dhyāyas tasthau].

“Why did the ascetic dwelling in the cemetery lament and why did he dance? Let your majesty tell me the cause of those actions.” The king said: “Listen, goblin.” He lamented, thinking: “Abandoning my old body I shall acquire a brahman’s body, which is a vessel of all good qualities [sarvaguṇādhāram].” As the king was saying this, the goblin hung again on the śiṃśapā tree.12

This story, like many others, and like much of what we have seen of possession in general, ends up reinforcing the social order.13 The king aspires to become a brahman as personal identities are effaced and replaced. This demonstration of the uncertainty of personal identity inspired the king to yearn for a higher position on the dharmic pecking order. Although it may be that this muffled ending reflects a sanitized, brahmanized reinscription, it also demonstrates the acceptance of the fragility of identity. In his battle to both retain and relocate his identity, the courageous king gains the upper hand over the vetāla. In this sense, the tantric ritual is delegitimized and the narrative becomes one of rationalization, as if the king were saying, “Look, we don’t have to be afraid of the powers of those old tantriks if we just use our heads and refuse to be afraid of ghosts.”

We can interpret this as an Indian iteration of Freud’s notion of the uncanny (Unheimlich), discussed above. The point in this discourse is that notions of the uncanny in fiction go hand in hand with a drive to rationalize. In this dialectic, the uncanny becomes separated as a genre or motif because of social and cultural pressure to distinguish the realms of rational and irrational.14 Such pressure is often extreme in Sanskritic culture, in which the formalities of rationalization and demystification, legacies of Mīmāṃsā and Vedānta orthodoxies, supersede magic, horror, and other things uncanny. This is evidenced not only here but even more so in the hagiographies of Śaṅkara, whose yogic exploits extend to the heart of the uncanny. These stand manifestly apart from the hyperrationalization of Śaṅkara’s advaitic discourse, in which he virtually never discusses his personal experience, the result of his unyielding priority of proof (pramāṇa) based on vedic precedence (sruti) over that of personal experience and, in particular, memory.

All these stories reiterate to a certain extent one of the themes of Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka: possible immunity from the effects of one’s actions or position in life by possessing another body. This is reinforced in the story of Indradatta from the beginning of KSS. Here, Indradatta, the brahman disciple of the grammarian Vyāḍi, enters the corpse of the recently deceased sūdra king Nanda in order to procure a million pieces of gold, which he intended to use to pay tuition for a very costly course in Sanskrit grammar. Unfortunately for Indradatta (and doubtless for Varṣa, the grammarian who stood to gain from the transaction), the king’s minister, believing Indradatta dead, decides to have his corpse burned.15 In all these cases, the body of the possessed and the possessor have been marked—with sacred threads, blue cloaks, sectarian marks, and so on, some mentioned, others assumed—and thus possess degrees of purity or impurity that distinguish them from other bodies. The body in possession is a topic that deserves further discussion, but we must postpone this until the final chapter, when we can address the topic more definitively.16
