+++
title = "04 The Bhagavadajjukāprahasanam"

+++
The most extended example of possession as a motif in Sanskrit fiction occurs in the early seventh-century drama Bhagavadajjukāprahasanam (The Farce of the Saint-Courtesan), by the Pallava king Mahendravarman (though it was more likely written by a paṇḍita in his court). One of the peculiarities of Sanskrit drama is that it is composed not just in Sanskrit but in one or more Middle Indic (Prakrit) dialects as well, based on the social ranking of the characters. Because several words in the Prakrit parts of the dialogue do not find Sanskrit phonological counterparts (e.g., āhiṇḍitum [to beg]), it is possible that this drama was originally written in Prakrit, after which a full Sanskrit rendering (chaya) was produced, rather than originally entirely in Sanskrit, after which the appropriate lines of the dialogue were translated into Prakrit. This is important because it may indicate that the flow of influence of the popularly conceived possession was from Prakrit, which is to say the public domain, into Sanskrit. However, this is by no means a final proof; it may simply be that the author worked in this fashion.

One striking aspect of the drama is the ease with which possession becomes its pivot. This suggests that by the middle of the first millennium C.E. it had become a familiar cultural event. Thus, without any introduction to its subtleties the author felt comfortable introducing it as the subject of a comedy (prahasana), which must have offered considerable enjoyment to its audience.17 In short, an unnamed mendicant (parivrajaka), a reprobate and convert to Buddhism, decides that he needs to prove his yogic skill to a particularly insolent disciple, Śāṇḍilya by name. He thus enters the body of a harlot (ajjukā, gaṇikā, vrṣalī) who had just died of poisoning from a snakebite, saying, “I will insert [niyojayāmi] my self [ātman] into the body of this courtesan.” After the mendicant has possessed her through his yogic skills (yogenāviṣṭāḥ), the harlot’s lover approaches her. To his astonishment, she replies in chaste Sanskrit, “Don’t touch me with unwashed hands!” (aprakṣālitapāṇibhyāṃ mā sprākṣīḥ). This contains a clear suggestion of sexuality as a result of unregulated possession, and the disciple does not hesitate to remind his guru of it.

The understanding of the relationship between sexuality and possession is also implicit in the earlier tale of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci, in which the sexuality is blunted by Vipula’s control and his guru’s admonitions. The connection becomes more explicit in the hagiographies of Śaṅkara, who lived about a century after the composition of the Bhagavadajjukā. The theme in these hagiographies is assumed by the Śaṅkara traditions to be unique, but we can see a long history behind it. We can well imagine that in the public mind possession must have been regarded as an entrée into surreptitious and illicit pleasure. The woman’s penetrability, on many levels, was apparently taken for granted by this time. As the play progresses, the agent of Yama (yamapuruṣaḥ), who is holding the soul (ātman) of the harlot, realizes upon receiving a message from Yama that her death had been a mistake. It was not, in fact, the appointed time for her to die. However, in seeing that the effect of the snakebite had been reversed, effectively reviving her, he decides to have a little fun and deposits her life-breaths (strīprāṇāḥ) in the temporarily vacated body of the mendicant.18 When, unaware that she is inhabiting the body of this buffoon of a mendicant, the harlot sees her lover, she asks him, in Prakrit, for a tight embrace and some liquor (rāmaḷia āliṃgehi maṃ … suraṃ pibāmi). This is doubtless a hilarious scene. A doctor is called in to provide a remedy for the snake’s poison, but announces that she has not in fact been bitten. Unknown to him, the agent of Yama has already removed any trace of the snakebite. Rather, the doctor declares, “she must be possessed” (āviṭṭhā khu bhave [Skt. āviṣṭā khalu bhavet]). Eventually, at the behest of Yama, his loyal if easily diverted servant turns to the mendicant, in the body of the harlot, and asks him to release her body (bhagavan mucyatāṃ vrṣalyāś śarīram). The yamapuruṣa then returns the jīvas to their proper places, normalcy is restored, and the drama comes to a rousing end.19

Read by itself, and through the screen of its deliberate humor, the Bhagavadajjukā suggests that women, especially those of low caste or disreputable professions, are highly susceptible to possession. They are regarded as penetrable, both sexually and by spirits, and susceptible to abandoned selfhood.20 Conversely, men, even buffoons like the mendicant, are depicted as ritual masters in control, at least in control of women. That women are depicted as highly susceptible to possession is largely consistent with the ethnographic record. Another Sanskrit work of fiction almost exactly contemporaneous with the Bhagavadajjukā that reaffirms these observations is the mid-seventh-century Daśakumāracarita of Daṇḍin. In this work, the vocabulary for possession is quite varied: In one story a maiden called Bālacandrikā is possessed (adhiṣṭhāya, adhiṣṭhitam) by a yakṣa.21 Later, in an interesting tale of amorousness tinged explicitly with sexual possession, a prince declares to an enemy king whose semidivine daughter he loves, “I am your son-in-law, the one who possessed [abhimarṣī] your daughter without your permission.”22 In spite of these passages, and the data from the Bhagavadajjukā, it is important here to recognize that women’s possession can be read as ritual mastery and men’s as abandoned selfhood, the opposite of what we see here. There are no hard and fast gender markers. The portrait in the Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad of the wife and daughter of Patañcala Kāpya, possessed by gandharvas, bears this out. It appears that they were in control of their possessing gandharvas and not under the control of Patañcala Kapya or any other man. Similarly, the accounts of Nala’s possession by Kali and Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka depict Nala and Śaṅkara as ritual masters who lost control of their powers—they fell prey to the uncanny—while Damayantī and Ubhayabhāratī countered this with their predilection for rational action.
