+++
title = "05 Can There Be an Aesthetic of Possession?"

+++
Any discussion of a possible formal aesthetic of possession based on classical theories of Indian poetics (alaṃkāraśāstra), the central element of which is cognate, in spirit at least, with what is known in Western scholarly discourse as audience response theory, must be addressed more fully after an evaluation of possession in devotional religious practice and an appraisal of Indian demonologies (bhūtavidyā). These are discussed in Chapters 9 and 12. However, it is important to begin this discussion here, because more than anywhere else, except perhaps in the more technical and inaccessible literature of Āyurveda and Tantra, possession is revealed in fiction and drama to be a conspicuous feature of popular culture, if not always well regarded among the literati. Explicitly fictional material, which we might define in the Indian context as narrative works with no pretense to direct representation of religious or cultural history,23 should, then, be more proximate to the realm of aesthetic theory than most other genres of Sanskrit literature. So, let us conclude this chapter by referring to some of the categories of mood and emotional construction, as well as audience response, in works of classical poetics, principally the Nāṭyaśāstra of Bharata, noting possible resonances of these in possession performance as reckoned in both classical literature and modern ethnographies. I should emphasize that this is highly speculative, because possession, as mentioned at the outset of this study, finds almost no place in any formal sastra or epistemologically circumscribed field of knowledge.

Does possession as revealed in these variegated sources betray a distinct or coherent aesthetic definition? If this is the case, then we should ask further whether this definition is consistent with formal aesthetic theory, beginning with its experiential categories, as articulated in the alaṃkāraśāstra. If we conclude that this is so, then we must examine how classical theory trickled down into, and perhaps defined, the structure and discourse of possession as reported in both literate and nonliterate Indian cultures. If we decide that no such classical theory or influence can be detected, then we might ask whether any other consistent aesthetic that lies outside the domain of sastraic discourse can be located, or, if there is no consistent aesthetic at all, then perhaps we can justly conclude that this is not a proper question to ask of our material.

If a formal aesthetic of possession can be derived, we must consider once again the notion of a clear and unbreachable distinction between high and low culture in India, one that demarcates the aesthetics of the upper classes and literati from that of the subaltern. We commenced this discussion by distinguishing the views of Kosambi from those of Lariviere on what we can learn of the subaltern from Sanskrit literature, the subaltern being preponderantly represented in ethnographies. As a result of recent work on the origins of tantric Buddhism by Davidson and others, discussed below (Chapter 11), the scales appear to be tipping in Lariviere’s favor. This tipping of the scales, however, may not be for the reason that Lariviere supposed, namely, renewed examination of Sanskrit manuscripts used in the construction of critical editions of often well-known texts. Rather, new strategies of deploying historical and inscriptional evidence that background these and other little-known texts has forced us to read them in new ways.24

It is impossible and inadvisable here to enter into a full discussion of categories for mood and emotion in alaṃkāraśāstra, but it will nevertheless assist us if we briefly review the most relevant aspects of “canonical” SanSkritic rasa or mood, bearing in mind Catherine Lutz’s admonition against naturalizing emotion, instead recognizing it “as a master cultural category”25 (at least in Western discourse) and treating it “as an ideological practice.”26 The classical texts, beginning with Bharata’s Nāṭyaśāstra in the second century C.E., agree on the possibility of eight principal rasas, often adding a ninth. These are not just moods presented as ontological categories, but soteriological states as well. It is important to note that these rasas are constructed from thirty-three stable and transitory emotions (sthāyi- and vyabhicāri-bhāvas) and are therefore categories superseding these emotions. The eight rasas upon which all the texts agree are erotic love (sṛṅgāra), comic laughter (hāsya), compassion arising from grief (karuṇa), ferocity (raudra), heroism (vira), fear or terror (bhayānaka), disgust (bibhatsa), and wonder (adbhūta).27 The ninth rasa, which many texts include, is tranquility (śānta).28 These rasas look very much like emotions in Western discourse; but in India they are carefully distinguished from them. Unlike in the West, however, in South Asian sāstraic thinking neither moods nor emotions bear the weight of irrationality, nor do they operate in opposition to religious truth or discourse. The classical texts almost universally declare that a properly staged and acted dramatic performance or a beautiful poem can evoke in the observer a pure experience of rasa, thus framing a salvific experience of enlightenment. The observer, however, must be a cultured appreciator, an aficionado (rasika), “one with a sympathetic heart” (sahṛdaya).29 The devaluation of emotion in Western religious discourse is not generally shared in India, at least not in classical India.30 Lutz writes that “emotions, in contrast to thoughts, predominantly happen to the person and are, therefore, not fully intentional.”31 This is decidedly not the case in India. In possession states, noted for their emotional intensity, the most prevalent of these rasas—and here we must remember that it is the possessed as well as the observer whose cognitive grasp of this is essential—are raudra and śānta, which happen to a person because they are intentional; they are, indeed, cultivated.

There is considerable evidence that possession is an intensely emotive state of awareness, a state that serves as a bridge from local culture to structures of authority and rationality. Although these structures are brahmanical in origin, by the eighth century they had leaked into Vajrayāna Buddhism. They include brahmanical ritual, legal, and social power and discourse markers and are in evidence throughout the sāstraic enterprise of category formation. In these various discourses, the classification of sentiments and moods (notably devoid of stratification until, arguably, the introduction of śānta, and later bhakti, as rasas) becomes a rhetorical strategy that transforms these sentiments and moods into recognizable (and cognizable) vehicles for mokṣa. Thus, the rhetorical bridge becomes an epistemological bridge, and from there it becomes an ontological force. The distance, then, between mood or sentiment and reason narrows, eventually influencing the dominant Indian scientific paradigm, which admits mood—or, as Freud would see it, the uncanny—as a legitimate option, if not a formal category. Paraphrasing Lutz, emotion (or mood) is not “linked to weakness” as an outcome of an ideological “split between emotion and thought.”32 Displays of pure or cultured emotion need not, then, represent unsocialized behavior, but become behavior that embodies high levels of cultural sophistication.33

Before moving to material that is more central to our study, let us look briefly at the coincidence of possession with classically described emotions in Varjayāna Buddhism. Indeed, the closest any formal epistemology comes to considering possession as a variable is found in a Vajrayāna text, the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, a yoginī Tantra that was discussed earlier. This text, originally in Sanskrit, but now extant only in Tibetan,34 explains that, by experiencing emotions (rasas) as manifestations of deities, various states of āveśa can be realized. The translation is as follows.

With song, cymbals, and dance, with gestures and with the sentiments—namely eroticism, heroism, compassion, humor, ferocity, terror, disgust, wonder, and tranquility—one’s aim will be achieved. By being endowed with the sentiments of eroticism, etc., dancing with the various gestures, and by uniting oneself with all, one will achieve all āveśa states. Eroticism [śṛṅgāra] corresponds to Vajrasattva, heroism [vīra] to the Hero Tathāgata, compassion [karuṇa] to Vajradhāra, humor [hāsya] to the supreme Lokesvara, ferocity [raudra] to Vajrasūrya, terror [bhayānaka] to Vajrarudra, disgust [bibhatsa] to Sākyamuni, wonder [adbhuta] to Arali, and tranquility [śānta] always corresponds to Buddha, since it pacifies all suffering.35

This is an exceptional passage, and may very well be isolated, though considerable swaths of early Hindu and Buddhist Tantra are lost or remain unstudied. However, nowhere else that I am aware of does a sastra or text of ritual or meditative practice (they appear to be combined here, dressed up with the accoutrements of Sanskritic formalism) link emotions with meditation on specific deities.

Now, to move into material in which the links between ethnography and text are more evident, in a recent article David Knipe has identified raudra and śānta as integral parts of the discourse of possession among both brahmans and non-brahmans in coastal Andhra Pradesh.36 The possession may be of any one of a number of goddesses (local tradition enumerates 101) or of deceased children who become established as household deities through possession. Significantly, deceased children are known locally as vīrabhadra, while the subsequently deified girls are known as vīrakanyaka and the boys as vīranna or vīruḍu.37 These designations carry an apparent conflation of vira and raudra, two canonical rasas, a fact reiterated frequently in the MBh, a text of preeminent importance in public religion in Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere in South India, where heroism was often expressed through ferocity, especially in local performance.38 In the discourse of performance, then, vira contains within it a semantic assumption of raudra. Further, the goddess, through her deeds of slaughtering demons, takes on the quality of a hero. This is true not just in popular texts such as the Durgasaptasati,39 but in possession ritual as well. Such possession of the goddesses is inevitably oracular, “for divination, propitiation, celebration or other purposes” and is “celebrated by ritualists for their ferocity and blazing anger.”40 Similarly, though the vīrakanyakas and vīrannas are deified, they nevertheless exhibit “the transparent rage of the deceased child deprived of a normal life-span and a timely death; the rage of the bereaved family, and the parents in particular; even the rage of the majority non-Brahman communities deprived of Brahmanic funerary symbols.”41 Knipe describes the raudra in these possessions as exhibitions of “opposition to established authorities,” “fierce possessiveness,” and other characteristics that embody the possessed with an “awesome and dangerous power.” Finally, from the heat (literally) of the possession, authenticated by fire walking, holding lit camphor and burning charcoal embers in their mouths, and so on, “they are brought down to a state of śānti … through eating fresh limes and being deluged with tubs of cold water,” often saturated with turmeric.42

The questions most apposite are whether the appearances of the words raudra and śānta to describe deity and spirit possession in the culture of coastal Andhra Pradesh are in fact drawn from classical Indian poetic theory and whether their provenance is more than a local and recent phenomenon in possession discourse. This is to ask, first, whether these usages have a retrievable history and, second, whether the adoption of these discursive categories also means the adoption of an entire aesthetics. First, let us recall our earlier discussion on the relationship between folk and classical in India (Chapter 4) and consider Ramanujan’s assertion of the difference between classical and folk aesthetics in India.43 Classical poetics, he says, is founded on a series of opposites (poet and audience, poet and character, character and actor), while in folk theater, “notions of possession are never far from the audience’s mind … bard and character, bard and audience, bard and actor, actor and character are merged at crucial moments and separated at ordinary times. One goes to the theater/ritual to experience such mergers in different degrees.”44

Regardless of these differences, I believe that it is fair, given the vagaries of cultural processes, especially in India, where oral tradition is often equal in authority to written text (even among elites), to suspend some of the basic requirements of classical poetics. A prime candidate for suspension is the requirement that it be the responsibility of the audience rather than the actor to apprehend rasa in its purity, as already asserted above. In the case of such ritual the actor is possessed, or at least is believed to be possessed, and is thus invested with greater authenticity than that of an ordinary actor in a staged and fully scripted drama. Multiple ethnographies reveal that, like the actor schooled in stagecraft, the possessed is aware of the demands and consequences of performing for the benefit of an audience or even an individual client. Nevertheless, the possessed exploits this valorized authenticity to enhance his or her authority, thus portraying and presumably experiencing the required rasa in a manner and strength that is not expected of the audience or client. The emotion and consequent rasa of the possessed is, by all accounts, sharper, more immediate, and better defined—a more complete dissociation and transformation of consciousness than what an observer can realize merely by following stage-managed cues. The disproportionate power assumed by the possessed in such a relationship is due to the client or audience’s ceding authority to the possessed. Although it is possible that possession—and the rasa that characterizes it—could be contagious, a contagion built on familiarity and practice, this is neither guaranteed nor generally expected. Thus, in ecstatic or divine possession, dialogue and authority tilt toward the possessed. The reasons for this are embedded in the very fascination of an audience with regard to a person whose possession has gained cultural and social legitimacy: a pregnant sense of revelation or manifestation, and the allure of the simultaneity of both attraction and danger. This could produce learned appreciators or sahṛdayas in the audience, even if such appreciation is not regarded as identical or tantamount to possession.

In both staged classical drama and public possession ritual, emotive reciprocation, albeit not necessarily precisely replicated (given the complexity of emotion), is essential for the success of the performance and the maintenance of the performative tradition. In both cases, it is to a great extent the actor who must manifest and sustain the prescribed emotion. Both the truth and the ambiguity of this may be illustrated, for example, in the performance of the Kṛṣṇa līlā, when the boy portraying Kṛṣṇa becomes Kṛṣṇa, becomes his “true form” (svarūp).45 This transformation is effected by the actor, whose costume, pedigree, and gestures help condition this transformation by contributing to the actor’s psychophysical attitude or bhāva, as well as by the audience, which recognizes this bhāva, resonates with it, and, from a state of meditative repose, intensifies it. There is an expectancy of the manifestation of the Lord Kṛṣṇa and of an appropriate emotion (usually śṛṇgāra or love) among the audience, an expectancy founded on a history of known, felt, and practiced emotional recognition and response. Nonliterate audiences as well as those more deeply embedded in Sanskritic culture develop emotional response similarly: through the application of specified and recognized bhāva. In Sanskritic culture, however, the construction and appearance of these states may be driven more definitively by rules that valorize and potentiate classical poetry and dramatic performance for author, actor, and audience alike. Yet the rules and models of presentation implicate the audience in a greater role in generating the mood appropriate to the composition.

The emotional empowerment of a highly literate, Sanskritically trained audience will, thus, be constructed with slightly variant cultural tools from those employed by an audience observing a Kṛṣṇa līlā or festival possession in South India. This is the case even if the empowerment and intensity of both of the latter tend to balance out.46 In fact, as ethnographies show, both Kṛṣṇa līlās and “folk” possession rituals draw elites as well as “folk” in large numbers, though the former participates in Sanskritic culture through extensive transformations into regional cultures, while the latter remains more distanced from any major Sanskritic source (e.g., the Siri rituals of Tulunad and Theyyam of Kerala). Thus, it appears that emotional or, more generally, aesthetic understanding validates performer, poet, and observer equally, in spite of power discrepancies, and is linked more distinctly with broader cultural and religious concerns and attitudes than with textual delineation of emotional structure and definition. The emotionally interactive nature of both folk and classical performance appears to offer a different perspective on the oppositions that Ramanujan rightly points out. This is why it is possible for an audience of highly educated brahmans and little-educated subalterns to identify and generate raudra and śānta in the same possession ritual. It is also the reason that a broad heritage of stories based on the Sanskrit vampire tales can create among audiences throughout India emotional responses that tally with the Sanskritic categories (even if not explicitly named), regardless of education, class, caste, or region of the audience. This, then, brings us back to our original question: Did the Sanskrit categories influence the understanding of emotional states in non-Sanskritic performance and discourse?

First, there is little evidence in Sanskrit literature of a direct association between possession and ferocity, āveśa and raudra. An example of this absence is in the tale of Nala, in which the word raudra does not appear in spite of a string of situations that could easily be described as “ferocious” or “wild.” The word raudra appears seven times in the Sauptikaparvan, in which Asvatthaman’s behavior is notably wild and ferocious. However, it does not appear there in semantic association with āveśa or its variant forms. Never in this narrative is āveśa delineated as raudra. The Indian imaginaire as a whole derives significantly from the MBh, while the popular imagination of fabulous possessing beings derives not just from the great epic but from the demonologies found in numerous āyurvedic and tantric texts. Yet raudra appears only once in the āyurvedic descriptions of grahas or “graspers,” beings, usually demonic, that possess people.47 The absence of an explicit semantic connection between āveśa and raudra in Sanskrit literature contrasts with its notable presence in South Indian ritual possession. This suggests that the association is a fortuitous relic of locally situated Sanskritic culture, rather than a manipulation by local scholars who understood Sanskritic aesthetic theory and then intentionally imposed it on local performance. The evident absence of wholesale imposition of Sanskritic aesthetic practice onto the body of these rituals supports this.

Raudra is derived from the word “Rudra,” the name of the angry and ferocious vedic and Purāṇic deity with populist roots,48 who forced his way into the sacrifice after being deprived of an equal share in the offerings. He ends up receiving his share, but outside the center of the sacrifice.49 The wildness and ferocity clearly evident in great swaths of possession events bears out the preponderance of what is classically described as raudra. This may be seen in classical tantric initiation, which employs descriptive terminology (e.g., ghūrṇi [whirling]), rather than terms for emotions, as well as in modern non-Sanskritic possession from Nepal to Kerala. For example, in the Draupadī cult, the possessed Kauravas resemble “madmen” (Ta. piccarkaḷ), and in a state of possession are overcome with anger (Ta. kōpam).50

The same can be said of śānta. Sanskrit literature reveals no direct semantic link between āveśa and śānta. As with raudra, many people in possession states appear to achieve a state of quiescence, often following an episode of raudra, anxiety, wrath, or trauma. If there is an approximation of this state in Sanskrit literature, it is likely to be found in the MBh or certain Tantras. But there is no such approximation in the former, and in the tantric texts we examine in Chapter 10 the nearest equivalent to quiescence in possession would be “sleep” (nidrā), as initiates are said to swoon, faint, or collapse. These texts also distinguish sharp moods such as raudra from ānanda (bliss), which is more often characterized as quiescent.51 Indeed, the emotional opposites, raudra and śānta, frequently alternate during states of possession.

As frequently, or even conventionally, as raudra or śānta might appear in possession in certain locales—which suggests that possession embodies a series of felt and situated practices among both the possessed and the audience52—still, we might ask, is this sufficient to establish an aesthetic of possession beyond the boundaries of the local tradition and its concurrent emotional semiotic? Probably not, yet it is important to recognize that, within local traditions, as much as in the diffuse Sanskritic tradition, it is in fact possible to locate distinct aesthetics. The material from Andhra Pradesh illustrates that the mingling of Sanskritic and local cultures can produce a complex semiotics of emotion. The evidence for this is extensive and can be stretched back much farther in time. The multilingual Sanskrit dramas of the first millennium illustrate that at this time aesthetic bridges were forged between classical and nonclassical sensibilities. This is borne out elsewhere in the history of Indian literature, in countless regional languages. We cannot enter into this topic here, but the discourse of possession in regional Ianguages (see Chapter 4) demonstrates deep and broad lexical and semantic continuities for terms that express the emotional content of possession.

The aesthetic range, as it appears in possession phenomena, consistently swings between control, sobriety, and propriety, on one hand, and ecstasy, anger, eroticism, and other sharp shifts in consciousness, on the other.53 Examples of the former may be drawn from the material already presented on yogic and other forms of controlled, externally induced possession, including Śaṅkara’s possession of the dead king Amaruka, possession tales from the MBh, including that of Ruci by Vipula Bhārgava, Nala by the malevolent Kali, and King Kalmāṣapāda by the rākṣasa Kiṃkara, as well as the possession of the prostitute by the blundering mendicant in the Bhagavadajjukā. These varied examples are expressed within the semantic range of pra√viś, as explained earlier. A further example of this kind might be noted here, as it is from a distinctly fictional text. This is the didactic Yaśodharacarita by the Jaina author Vāḍirāja, dated to around 1025 C.E. (though the story is surely much older), replicated in Janna’s thirteenth-century Kannada text of same name. In this graphically violent lesson on nonviolence (ahiṃsā, the primary Jain virtue), a doomed king, Yasodhara, is ordered by his mother to offer a rooster as sacrifice to the goddess. Although the rooster is made of rice flour (śālipiṣṭamaya-kukkuṭa), thereby enabling Yasodhara to escape the karmic burden of killing a living being, it is still too close to the intent of actual killing (saṇkalpahiṃsa). As fate would have it, the skillfully painted (citrasauṣṭhava) artificial rooster proves a tempting home for a wayward spirit (atimānuṣa). The spirit possesses the rooster, which subsequently comes to life, screams, and flies upward.54 The rooster is then slaughtered by the king, an act with the worst possible karmic consequences for him, including rebirth in multiple hell worlds. Examples of possession that illustrate the opposite aesthetic, ecstasy, eroticism, and so on fit in more easily within the strict definition of ā√viś. These include the possession of the early vedic ritualists by Soma, a preponderant amount of bhakti-induced possession, and that ensuing from tantric initiation, all discussed below, and most of the possession described in the ethnographies.

In sum, this chapter offers evidence for dual, if related, paradigms of emotional definition in India, one Sanskritic, the other non-Sanskritic. Although I have drawn the latter from Telugu, examples of this from most (if not all) major Indian regional languages are likely to be found. What I am positing here is an epistemology that flows from folk to classical and back again, producing new and unique Indian forms of knowing. However, these never quite abandon old ways of knowing, in part because of a generally respected conservative tug that preserves a balance between old and new in different formulations. The Indic texts and ethnographies cited here also highlight different ways of knowing, Indian and Western, in an area of discourse that deserves more nuanced treatment than it has hitherto received.
