+++
title = "06 NOTES"

+++
1. See Clifford 1984:148ff.
2. See, for example, the work of Parpola, who has often speculated on the origins of the Sanskrit epics (e.g., 2002). Parpola sees a mid-first-millennium B.C.E. migration of pale-skinned (pāṇḍu) Iranians who migrated into India, integrated with the local population, legitimated themselves by fabricating genealogies that situated them in ruling families, and finally disseminated tales of their exploits. Few Indologists will easily subscribe to this theory, but it demonstrates that consideration of the MBh as fiction remains an ongoing enterprise.
3. Morris 2000:125.
4. Cuneo 2001 discusses this phenomenon extensively. In contemporary South Asia, the Bollywood film Aks (2000) has many of the same themes. It was not a particularly good or successful film and had little impact on Indian popular culture. The film Bhoot (2003) was somewhat better but similarly left little imprint. Much better and more successful was Paheli (2005); see preface above.
5. Bloomfield 1917:7.
6. Tawney 1901:9–10. The text reads: bhūpaḥ prāharike dvije nijagajasyāṅge ’viśad vidyayā | vipro bhūpavapur viveśa nṛpatiḥ krīḍaśuko ’bhūt tataḥ | pallīgātraniveśitātmānaṃ nṛpe vyāmṛśya devyā mṛtim | vipraḥ kīram ajīvayan nijatanuṃ śrī(vi)kramo labdhavān || Sometimes talking parrots narrate lengthy tales, including those of possession. See the Sukasaptati, stories 46–47, and the translation by Haksar 2000: 150–154.
7. See Parkinson 1991, who distinguishes “apparitionist” from “non-apparitionist” interpretations of the existence of ghosts. In the former, they are viewed as veridical manifestations of paranormal reality, while in the latter they are regarded as subjective hallucinations. Parkinson maintains that James did not adopt either stance, but was neutral on the issue. Nevertheless, his work profoundly influenced later writing on ghosts, possession, and the paranormal.
8. A highly recommended example of possession in contemporary Asian fiction appears in the first volume of Osamu Tezuka’s (1928–89) six-volume phantasmagorical manga comic on the life and times of the Buddha; cf. Buddha Vol. 1: Kapilavastu (2003:311–356). This work illustrates the process of constructing a story line from elements of popular culture grafted onto historical narrative. Tezuka devotes considerable space to characters of his own invention, including Chapra, a slave boy born as a sūdra, who in his wanderings meets a pariah boy named Tatta, who has the power to possess the bodies of animals and then have them do his bidding.
9. On the topic of authenticity in Indian ritual, which is to say the argument that what is closest to an original or archetypal form is most authentic, see F. Smith 2001b. I cannot here enter more deeply into the extensive recent discourse on the power of the image and the status of representation. For this, one must study the works of Derrida, particularly his notion of différence (1976), his essay “Plato’s Pharmacy” (pharmakon) (1981), and his meditations on mourning, esp. the chapter on Louis Marin (2001:139–164). Marin argues that the virtue of the image is its reference to its own constructed, derivative nature.
10. Parpola 1998:278–280; for the text, see KSS 75.34–57, 188; 98.60–74; 99.1–30.
11. Echoes of this continue to appear in the popular tantric imagination. See, e.g., Svoboda 1986: ch. 1.
12. Translation based on Emeneau 1934:106ff. Compare this with tale 22 of Vetālapañcaviṃśati of Śivadāsa, “Of the Yogi Who Went from One Body to Another” (Śivadāsa 1995:164–167). This is roughly the same story, but here it is a brahman named Nārāyaṇa who had studied the art of entering the body of another. The discourse varies slightly, and there is no mention of a dead body or a smasāna. Both Jambhaladatta and Śivadāsa (eleventh to fourteenth century) postdate the KSS version (1070 C.E.).
13. See Granoff 1998a:222. Near end of this story, the Jain rendition of the tale of Nala and Damayaṃtī, “Dhanna hastened to his house and quickly returned with the milk. Filled with devotion, he gave the great ascetic milk to drink to break his fast.” This version becomes so whitewashed that it has none of the possession of the MBh original.
14. Cf. Harootunian 1988 on early modern Japan.
15. See Bloomfield (1917:9f.), who contends, wrongly, that notions of āveśa began with yoga philosophy and that philosophy and fairytale conspired for “the complete obliteration of the boundary line between fact and fancy” (p. 3). “Nothing is impossible,” he adds, “where the canons of time and space and number, and of every sobering empirical experience have been undermined by such a travesty on scientific thought” (ibid.).
16. Cf., e.g., Kasulis et al. 1993:39–145; more generally, see Bynum 1994, Sheets-Johnstone 1992, and especially LaFleur 1998, on the topic of the body in the study of religion.
17. The cultural resonances of this with the Doonesbury cartoon characters Boopsie and Hunk-Ra (see Chapter 3) are perhaps not too far-fetched.
18. See Lockwood and Bhat 1994:32.
19. Compare this with the central theme in Brinkhaus 1987.
20. I am reminded of Henry James Sr.’s declaration in the 1870s (I cannot remember the source) that individualism was a better idea for men than women because social order depended on women’s willingness to give up “selfhood.” Willing or, more likely, otherwise, the anthropological record bears this out. Indeed, abandoned selfhood, at least selfhood as thought about in the West, does contribute to possession.
21. Pūrvapīṭhikā, pp. 42, 44; e.g., p. 42: yakṣāḥ kaścid adhiṣṭhāya bālacandrikāṃ nivasati, p. 44: bālacandrikām adhiṣṭhitaṃ yakṣaṃ balavantam.
22. Daśakumāracarita, part 2, p. 176: aham asmi bhavajjāmātā bhavadanumatyā vinā tava kanyābhimarṣī.
23. Examples of works we must exclude would, then, be the MBh, Rām, Purāṇas, Brajbhāṣā vārtā literature, with the caveat noted with respect to the MBh.
24. See Chapter 11 and Inden et al. 2000. Despite Inden’s methodological overkill—banning the words “religion” and “ritual,” among others, from his book, which results in clumsiness and obfuscation rather than clarity—the authors’ use of inscriptional and historical sources represents a step forward in historical analysis of South Asian cultural and religious textuality.
25. Lutz 1988:54.
26. Ibid.:4.
27. See Bynum 2001:39ff., for an inquiry into wonder as emotion, based on medieval Christian writings. In constructing a theory of wonder, Bynum subsumes within it terror and disgust (among others), which in South Asia are regarded as independent emotions. She asserts that the “wonder-reaction ranges from terror and disgust to solemn astonishment and playful delight” (p. 57). Notwithstanding the excellent work of Lutz, Nussbaum, Lynch, and others, a great deal remains to be done on the study of emotions across cultures.
28. The most accessible discussions of rasas and their enumeration are Masson and Patwardhan 1969 and Raghavan 1967; cf. the discussion in Chary 1993:55–61. See also Raghavan 1978:427–433, 438–453, which addresses the question of bhāva. Bhoja regards all bhāvas as rasas, in disagreement with Abhinavagupta, cf. ibid.:283–285). With respect to the salvific value of rasa, Bhoja says of śṛṅgāra: yena śṛṅgarīyate sa śṛṅgāraḥ (it is itself the peak and takes men to the peak of perfection). The third stage of rasa is called by Bhoja uttarakoṭi, which synthesizes all the scattered bhāvas within the ahamkāra and turns them into prcman, a stage of divine love. “In this stage every bhāva is a kind of love, preman, and every kind of love is a love of ātman, ahaṃkāra, abhimāna, or śṛṅgāra” (ibid.:440). Thus, Bhoja’s rasa theory is called śṛṅgārādvaita in the Sāhityamīmāṃsā (ibid.:458; Sāhityamīmāṃsā, p. 161).
29. This is the translation in Ingalls et al. 1990:68ff. Abhinavagupta brings out the character of the word itself, which should be translated literally as “one with a shared heart.” On sahṛdaya, Abhinava says that it “denotes persons who are capable of identifying with the subject matter, as the mirror of their hearts has been polished by the constant study and practice of poetry, and also who respond to it sympathetically in their own hearts” (ibid.:70). See also Hardikar 1994.
30. On this, note the discussions in Chapter 2, of the early seventeenth-century Danish missionary to Malabar, Bartholomaeus Ziegenbalg, and the twentieth-century missionary in Panjab, Wayne McClintock.
31. Lutz 1988:63 (emphasis in original).
32. Ibid.:65.
33. Lutz recognizes that emotions might also bear a positive, humanizing value. She writes: “[E]motions are associated, in their positive but secondary sense of the engaged, with the spiritual and the sublime. To have feelings is to be truly human, which is to say, transcendent of the purely physical. Whereas emotions stand in close relationship to the instinctual when contrasted with cognition, they emerge as opposed to the animalistic and physical connotations of the instinctual when contrasted with what can be called the spiritual death of estrangement” (ibid.:66). This, she notes, is the position in American culture. In Indian culture, though, as we can see here, the subjectivity of emotion (or mood) becomes objectified and subject to positivistic categorization. The engagement of emotion and mood with the “spiritual and the sublime” does not mark them as truly or authentically human, but truly and authentically divine as well, and not only “transcendent of the purely physical” but deeply implicit within it.
34. See Gray 2004:4n12 for discussion of its place in the Kanjur.
35. Ibid.:4–5.
36. Knipe 2001. Halliburton is, thus, incorrect in assuming that “popular consumption of elite philosophy may be what makes Kerala unique” (2002:1126). Again: “[W]hat may make Kerala unique is that these elite philosophies and phenomenologies seem to be popularly consumed” (p. 1130); and more specifically: “What Kerala has that other states do not—and what makes its phenomenology unique—is the popular consumption of what would be considered only elite phenomenological discourses in other parts of the country” (p. 1131). The responses to Kṛṣṇa and Rām lilā should also be included in this reckoning (as specified below). Halliburton has cast a very small net then made a dubious claim based on it. In short, his understanding of Indian philosophy and regional cultures is not commensurate with his profound command of anthropological theory.
37. Childhood possession, including of Vīrabhadra, is the main topic of Chapter 11.
38. See Biardeau 1989a; Hiltebeitel 1988, 1991.
39. See Coburn 1984, 1991.
40. Knipe 2001:344.
41. Ibid.
42. Ibid.: 348–349, 351.
43. I am especially indebted to William Sax for discussion on this and some of the following points.
44. Ramanujan 1986a: 69–70.
45. Cf. Hawley 1981:13, 61.
46. See Wulff 1984:20–21 for the differences in emotional comprehension of a Kṛṣṇa līlā performed in Vrindaban and the classical Sanskrit dramas of Rūpa Gosvāmī, one of the foremost exponents of canonizing bhakti as a rasa.
47. See Aṣṭāṅgahṛdaya Saṃhitā 6.4.24 (PP. 495–499 below), for a description of a person possessed by a brahmarākṣasa.
48. Cf. the litany to Rudra in the Krṣṇayajurveda that names those of whom he is the lord: e.g., spirits, dogs, thieves (Taittirīya Saṃhitā 4.5.1–11). See Staal 1983:1:512–525, for a description of the rite in the agnicayana and the text and translation of the TS passage.
49. The offering to Rudra in the agnicayana consists of a stream of milk on the left-wing tip of the completed bird-shaped fire altar, not in the āhavanīya, the main fire into which oblations to the other gods are offered; cf. Staal 1983.
50. Hiltebeitel 1988:267–275 and Chapter 4.
51. See Chapter 10, nn. 27, 32, 34.
52. Rich Freeman has elucidated this in many of his articles.
53. See the remarks of Cort 2001:258.
54. See the edition and translation of the Sanskrit: Yaśodharacarita, ed. Krishnamoorthy (1963:136, 206); for the English translation of the Kannada version, see Janna 1994:32–34. Jaina authors employ the word vyantara (Kannada bantara) to designate a class of nasty ethereal beings. Vāḍirāja does not use this word, but the story is told in Kannada today with the word bantara used for the spirit. (I am grateful to the late D. R. Nagaraj for this information.) The Sanskrit text uses the term nivāsitadaivam to indicate the possession, which the commentator glosses nivāsitabhūtagraham. For more on the topic of the miraculous as a mediator of karma (and disease) in Jainism, see Granoff 1998b.
 