+++
title = "01 THE WARRIOR GODDESS"

+++

Although several Vedic deities play central roles as demon slayers and warriors, no goddesses are cast in this function in Vedic literature. The name Durgā is mentioned in Vedic literature,1 but no goddess resembling the warrior goddess of later Hinduism is to be found in these early texts.

Around the fourth century A.D. images of Durgā slaying a buffalo begin to become common throughout India.2 By the medieval period \(after the sixth century\) Durgā has become a well-known and popularly worshiped deity. Her mythological deeds come to be told in many texts, and descriptions of and injunctions to undertake her autumnal worship are common in several late *Upa-purāṇas.*3

Durgā’s historical origin seems to be among the indigenous non-Āryan cultures of India. In addition to there being no similar goddesses among the deities of the Vedic tradition, many early references to Durgā associate her with peripheral areas such as the Vindhya Mountains, tribal peoples such as the śabaras, and non-Āryan habits such as drinking liquor and blood and eating meat.4 Although Durgā becomes an establishment goddess in medieval Hinduism, protecting the cosmos from the threat of demons and guarding dharma like a female version of Viṣṇu, her roots seem to be among the tribal and peasant cultures of India, which eventually leavened the male-dominated Vedic pantheon with several goddesses associated with power, blood, and battle.

Hindu mythology includes several accounts of Durgā’s origin. She is sometimes said to arise from Viṣṇu as the power that makes him sleep or as his magical, creative power. In the *Viṣṇu-purāna* Viṣṇu enlists her aid to help delude a demon king who is threatening the infant Kṛṣṇa \(5.1.93\). In the *Devī-māhātmya* she comes to the aid of the god Brahmā and ultimately of Viṣṇu himself when Brahmā invokes her to leave the slumbering Viṣṇu so that Viṣṇu will awaken and fight the demons Madhu and Kaitabha \(1\). The *Skanda-purāṇa* relates that once upon a time a demon named Durgā threatened the world. Śiva requested Pārvatī to slay the demon. Pārvatī then assumed the form of a warrior goddess and defeated the demon, who took the form of a buffalo. Thereafter, Pārvatī was known by the name Durgā \(2.83\).5 A similar account of her origin occurs in myths relating her defeat of the demons śumbha and Niśumbha. Durgā emerges from Pārvatī in these accounts when Pārvatī sheds her outer sheath, which takes on an identity of its own as a warrior goddess.6

The best-known account of Durgā’s origin, however, is told in connection with her defeat of the demon Mahiṣa. After performing heroic austerities, Mahiṣa was granted the boon that he would be invincible to all opponents except a woman. He subsequently defeated the gods in battle and usurped their positions. The gods then assembled and, angry at the thought of Mahiṣa’s triumph and their apparent inability to do anything about it, emitted their fiery energies. This great mass of light and strength congealed into the body of a beautiful woman, whose splendor spread through the universe. The parts of her body were formed from the male gods. Her face was formed from Śiva, her hair from Yama, her arms from Viṣṇu, and so on. Similarly, each of the male deities from whom she had been created gave her a weapon. Śiva gave her his trident, Viṣṇu gave her his *cakra* \(a discus-like weapon\), Vayu his bow and arrows, and so on. Equipped by the gods and supplied by the god Himalaya with a lion as her vehicle, Durgā, the embodied strength of the gods, then roared mightily, causing the earth to shake.7

The creation of the goddess Durgā thus takes place in the context of a cosmic crisis precipitated by a demon whom the male gods are unable to subdue. She is created because the situation calls for a woman, a superior warrior, a peculiar power possessed by the goddess with which the demon may be deluded, or a combination of all three. Invariably Durgā defeats the demon handily, demonstrating both superior martial ability and superior power. On the battlefield she often creates female helpers from herself. The most famous of these are the goddess Kālī and a group of ferocious deities known as the Mātṛkās \(mothers\), who usually number seven.8 These goddesses seem to embody Durgā’s fury and are wild, bloodthirsty, and particularly fierce.9 Durgā does not create male helpers, and to my knowledge she does not fight with male allies. Although she is created by the male gods and does their bidding and although she is observed and applauded by them, she \(along with her female helpers and attendants\) fights without direct male support against male demons—and she always wins.

Durgā’s distinctive nature, and to a great extent probably her appeal, comes from the combination of world-supportive qualities and liminal characteristics that associate her with the periphery of civilized order.10 In many respects Durgā violates the model of the Hindu woman. She is not submissive, she is not subordinated to a male deity, she does not fulfill household duties, and she excels at what is traditionally a male function, fighting in battle. As an independent warrior who can hold her own against any male on the battlefield, she reverses the normal role for females and therefore stands outside normal society. Unlike the normal female, Durgā does not lend her power or *śakti* to a male consort but rather *takes* power from the male gods in order to perform her own heroic exploits.11 They give up their inner strength, fire, and heat to create her and in so doing surrender their potency to her.

Many renditions of Durgā’s mythological exploits highlight her role reversal by portraying her male antagonists as enamored of her and wanting to marry her. They have no wish to fight her at all, assume that she will be no match for them in battle, and proceed to make offers of marriage to her.12 In some variants of the myth Durgā explains to her antagonist and would-be suitor that her family has imposed a condition on her marriage, namely, that her husband must first defeat her in battle. The suitor is unable to do this, of course, and is annihilated in his attempt. In some forms of the myth the goddess rejects the offer of marriage with fierce, combative language, foretelling how she will tear her would-be suitor to pieces in battle. The antagonist, however, insists on interpreting this language as a metaphor for love play and blindly insists on trying to overcome the goddess in battle.13 In the Mahiṣa myth as told in the *Devī-bhāgavata-purāna,* for example, a long dialogue takes place between Durgā and the demon in which Mahiṣa insists that as a woman the goddess is too delicate to fight, too beautiful for anything but love play, and must come under the protection and guidance of a man in order to fulfill her proper proclivities \(5.16.46–65\).



Durgā slaying Mahiṣa. Miniature painting from School of Nupur, about 1765 A.D. Victoria and Albert Museum. Marguerite-Marie Deneck, *Indian Art* \(London: Paul Hamlyn, 1967\), fig. 46.

Because Durgā is unprotected by a male deity, Mahiṣa assumes that she is helpless \(5.12.14–30\), which is the way that women are portrayed in the *Dharma-śāstras.14* There women are said to be incapable of handling their own affairs and to be socially inconsequential without relationships with men. They are significant primarily as sisters, daughters, and mothers of males and as wives. Nearly all forms of Durgā’s mythical exploits portray her as independent from male support and relationships yet irresistibly powerful. She is beautiful and seductive in appearance, but her beauty does not serve its normal function, which is to attract a husband. It serves to entice her victims into fatal battle.

In short, this beautiful young woman who slays demons seeking to be her lovers and who exists independent from male protection or guidance represents a vision of the feminine that challenges the stereotyped view of women found in traditional Hindu law books. Such a characterization perhaps suggests the extraordinary power that is repressed in women who are forced into submissive and socially demeaning roles. In her role reversal Durgā exists outside normal structures and provides a version of reality that potentially, at least, may be refreshing and socially invigorating.15

Durgā’s liminal nature is also evident in her favorite habitats and in some of her favorite habits. Nearly all of Durgā’s myths associate her with mountains, usually the Himalayas or the Vindhyas. One of her common epithets is Vindhyavāsinī, “she who dwells in the Vindhya Mountains.” These mountainous regions are areas considered geographically peripheral to civilized society and inaccessible except through heroic efforts. The Vindhyas, in particular, are also regarded as dangerous because of the violent and hostile tribal peoples who dwell there. Indeed, Durgā is said to be worshiped by tribal groups such as the śabaras. In this worship, furthermore, she is said to receive \(and to enjoy\) meat and blood, both of which are regarded by civilized Āryan society as highly polluting. In the *Devī-māhātmya* Durgā is also described as quaffing wine during battle in her fight with Mahiṣa \(3.33\) and as laughing and glaring with reddened eyes under its influence. In the concluding scene of the *Devī-māhātmya* her devotees are instructed to propitiate her with offerings of their own flesh and blood \(13.8\). Durgā’s preference for inaccessible dwelling places, her worship by tribal peoples, her taste for intoxicating drink, meat, and blood, her ferocious behavior on the battlefield, and her preference for the flesh and blood of her devotees convey a portrait of a goddess who stands outside the civilized order of dharma; her presence is to be found only after stepping out of the orderly world into the liminal space of the mountainous regions where she dwells.

Reinforcing Durgā’s tendencies to the antistructural or liminal are certain associations with negative, or at least inauspicious, qualities or powers such as sleep, hunger, and *māyā* \(in the sense of delusion\). In the Mahiṣa episode of the *Devī-māhātmya* she is called she whose form is sleep \(5.15\), she whose form is hunger \(5.16\), she whose form is shadow \(5.17\), and she whose form is thirst \(5.19\).

These associations are particularly emphasized in versions of the myth that tell of Durgā’s aid to Brahmā and Viṣṇu against the demons Madhu and Kaitabha. In this myth as told in the *Devī-māhātmya* Madhu and Kaitabha are born from Viṣṇu’s ear wax. They threaten to kill the god Brahmā, who in turn has been born from a lotus sprung from Viṣṇu’s navel. Brahmā appeals to the goddess in the form of sleep to come forth from Viṣṇu so that he will awaken and slay the demons. Throughout the episode the goddess is called Mahāmāya, the power that throws people into the bondage of delusion and attachment \(1.40\). Indeed, Viṣṇu is successful in slaying Madhu and Kaitabha only because the goddess deludes them into offering Viṣṇu a boon; he accepts and asks that they permit him to slay them \(1.73–74\). She is also called great delusion \(Mahāmohā\) \(1.58\); the great demoness \(Mahāsurī\) \(1.58\); the black night, the great night, the night of delusion \(1.59\); darkness \(Tāmasī\) \(1.68\); the force that seizes those of knowledge and leads them to delusion \(1.42\); and the cause of bondage in the world \(1.44\). The entire Madhu-Kaitabha episode as told in the *Devī-māhātmya* hinges on Viṣṇu’s helplessness as long as he is pervaded by the goddess, whose primary effect on him is to keep him unconscious. In this episode, then, the goddess has numbing, deluding, dark qualities, even though she is called by many positive terms. Again, Durgā’s role vis-à-vis Viṣṇu seems exactly the opposite of the normal role of a goddess as a male deity’s *śakti,* the power that enables the god to act in the world. In this myth Viṣṇu is only enabled to act when the goddess *leaves* him. She does not empower, enliven, or strengthen Viṣṇu; she puts him to sleep, reducing him to powerlessness.

Counterbalancing Durgā’s liminal, peripheral nature, which at times seems to threaten dharmic stability and to inhibit the spiritual quest for *mokṣa,* is her role as protectress of the cosmos. Dominating her mythology is her role as the destroyer of demons who have usurped the position of the gods. As a great warrior she is created by the gods and acts on their behalf. While she is often said to transcend the male gods who create her and to excel them on the battlefield, she acts for their welfare. In doing this she acts to maintain or restore cosmic harmony and balance.

The theology underlying Durgā’s appearances and exploits is clear in the *Devī-māhātmya,* the most famous text extolling her deeds. Durgā is said to underlie or pervade the cosmos; to create, maintain, and periodically destroy it according to the rhythmic sequences of Hindu cosmology \(12.33–35\); and to assume different forms from time to time when cosmic balance is threatened by enemies of the lesser gods \(11.38–51\). The *Devī-māhātmya* puts the matter succinctly: “Though she is eternal, the goddess becomes manifest over and over again to protect the world” \(12.32\).

The *Devī-māhātmya* itself relates three of Durgā’s cosmic interventions on behalf of the gods: the battle with Madhu and Kaitabha; the battle with Mahiṣa and his army; and the battle with śumbha and Niśumbha and their generals, Caṇḍa, Muṇḍa, and Raktabīja. The text also refers specifically to five other appearances of the goddess \(11.38–51\) and implies that she is incarnate in many more forms \(12.32\). The myths that are told in detail in the *Devī-māhātmya* conform to a structure that underlines Durgā’s role as the upholder and protector of the dharmic order. Because the myths are cast in traditional structure, they also make the point that Durgā transcends the great male gods of the Hindu pantheon, who in other texts usually have the central role in these myths.

The structure to which the demon-slaying myths of Durgā conform is found throughout Hindu mythological texts and is consistent despite the specific deity who is featured in the myth. In basic outline the structure is as follows: \(1\) a demon gains great power through doing austerities, is granted a boon as a reward, and becomes nearly invincible; \(2\) the demon defeats the gods and takes over their positions; \(3\) the gods prepare their revenge by creating a special being who can defeat the demon despite the boon, or else the lesser gods petition one of the great deities \(Śiva, Viṣṇu, or a great goddess\) to intervene on their behalf; \(4\) the battle takes place and often includes the creation of helpers by the hero or heroine; \(5\) the demon is defeated, either slain or made subservient to the gods; \(6\) the gods praise the demon slayer.16 In the Madhu and Kaitabha myth and the myth of śumbha and Niśumbha, Durgā is petitioned to help the gods, whereas in the Mahiṣa myth she is specially created by the gods. In the Mahiṣa and śumbha and Niśumbha myths the goddess takes a direct, active part in the battle itself, demonstrating her superior martial skills against her opponents. In the śumbha and Niśumbha myth she also creates helpers in the form of ferocious goddesses. In all three episodes the gods collectively praise Durgā during the battle or after she has defeated the demons.

The theology underlying Durgā’s cosmic interventions and the structure of the demon-slaying myths thus conform to well-known Hindu ideas and forms. The idea of a deity’s descending to the world from time to time in various forms to maintain the balance of cosmic order is a central Vaiṣṇavite idea. Ever since the time of the *Bhāgavad-gītā* the idea of Viṣṇu’s descending to the world in different forms in order to combat disorder has been well known in the Hindu tradition. Durgā, in the *Devī-māhātmya,* is heir to this *avatāra* theology. In fact, in many ways Durgā is a female version of Viṣṇu. She, like him, creates, maintains, and destroys the world; intervenes on a cosmic scale whenever disorder threatens to disrupt the world in the form of certain demons; and is approached by the other gods as their savior in times of distress. This conformity to a well-known type of theology does not detract from Durgā’s appeal, power, or prestige. On the contrary, by creating her in this familiar role and by telling her myths according to a familiar structure, the author of the *Devī-māhātmya* underlines Durgā’s supremacy and might.17

Durgā’s role as cosmic queen is complemented by her role as a personal comforter who intervenes on behalf of her devotees. Near the end of the *Devī-māhātmya,* after the world has been restored to order, Durgā herself says that she is quick to hearken to the pleas of her devotees and that she may be petitioned in times of distress to help those who worship her. She mentions specifically forest fires, wild animals, robbers, imprisonment, execution, and battle as some threats from which she will save her devotees \(12.24–28\). At the end of the *Devī-māhātmya,* after being petitioned by two of her devotees \(part of whose petition has included offering their own blood to the goddess\), she appears before them and grants their desires. To one she returns his wealth and kingdom and to the other she grants ultimate liberation \(13.11–15\). Durgā, then, is not just a powerful, transcendent force whose sole concern is maintaining the cosmic rhythms, who is moved to action only when the world itself is threatened. She is attentive to the needs of her devotees and intervenes on their behalf if asked to do so. She is a personal savior as well as a great battle queen who fights to defeat the enemies of the gods.



Durgā. South Indian bronze, early Choḷa, ca. 1000 A.D. Government Museum, Madras. C. Sivaramamurti, *South Indian Bronzes* \(New Delhi: Lalit Kala Akademi, 1963\), plate 50. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.

Durgā’s distinctive nature also has to do with her identification with certain important Hindu philosophic ideas. The *Devī-māhātmya* and other texts extolling Durgā state that she is identical with or associated with *śakti, māyā,* and *prakṛti.* This is to say that in some way Durgā represents a dramatic illustration of these ideas or that these ideas can be discerned in her nature. *śakti* is almost always understood to be the underlying power of the divine, the aspect of the divine that permits and provokes creative activity. *śakti,* furthermore, is almost always understood to be a positive force. When viewed in concrete form, *śakti* is usually personified as a goddess. A common belief is that without his *śakti,* without his female counterpart, a male deity is ineffective, weak, and immobilized. Durgā’s creation by the assembled male deities in the Mahiṣa episode dramatically depicts the goddess as *śakti.* Although the energy and heat that the deities contribute to her formation is called *tejas,* not *śakti,* it is clear that the male gods are contributing their strength and vigor to the goddess, who epitomizes power, action, and strength in the battle with the demon.18 Durgā, particularly in her role as battle queen, is action and power personified and as such is a fitting representation of the idea of *śakti.*

Durgā as a personification of *māyā* is most clearly seen in the Madhu and Kaitabha episode, in which she deludes the demons so that Viṣṇu can slay them and in which she is repeatedly referred to as Mahāmāyā and as Viṣṇu’s *māyā. Māyā* has negative connotations in Hindu philosophy and mythology, as does Durgā, particularly in this episode. *Māyā* is that which deludes individuals into thinking themselves to be the center of the world, the power that prevents individuals from seeing things as they really are. *Māyā* is that which impels individuals into self-centered, egotistical actions. *Māyā* is the sense of ego, personal identity, and individuality which clouds the underlying unity of reality and masks one’s essential identity with *brahman* or some exalted being such as Viṣṇu, Śiva, or Durgā. *Māyā,* however, may also be understood as a positive, creative force not unlike *śakti. Māyā* may be understood as the power that enables a deity to display or embody himself or herself and therefore as the power that enables a deity to act.

When Durgā is called M*ā*y*ā*, or equated or associated with it, both connotations—delusion and creation—are suggested. Like Viṣṇu, Durgā creates the world through her extraordinary power, but then she bewitches the creatures she has created. Underlying this apparently incomprehensible “game” is the idea of divine *līlā* \(sport, play, or dalliance\), according to which the gods never act out of necessity but only out of a sense of play.19 Unlike mere mortals, the gods \(in this case Durgā\) act not from pragmatic motives but only to amuse themselves or to display themselves. The way in which Durgā’s defeat of Mahiṣa is often depicted in Indian art suggests this theme. Typically she is shown bringing a blizzard of weapons to bear on the hapless demon, who is half-emerging in his human form from the carcass of his former buffalo form. Durgā’s many arms are all in motion, and she is a perfect vision of power in action. Her face, however, is calm and shows no sign of strain. For her this is mere sport and requires no undue exertion. It is a game for her, it is *līlā.20* She enters into the cosmic struggle between the lesser gods and the demons because it pleases her, not out of any sense of compulsion.

Durgā’s identification with *prakṛti* and with the earth itself makes another theological point. *prakṛti* is the physical world as well as the inherent rhythms within this world that impel nature to gratify and produce itself in its manifold species. *prakṛti* is both the primordial matter from which all material things come and the living instincts and patterns that imbue the material world with its proclivities to sustain and recreate itself in individual beings. As *prakṛti,* then, Durgā is inextricably associated with the physical world, the world she creates, sustains, and protects in her various forms. Durgā’s identification with the world is unambiguous. The *Devī-māhātmya* makes a point at several places to say that she *is* the world, she is all this \(11.2–3, 5–6\). As the earth itself she conveys cosmic stability. She is the foundation of all creatures and that which nourishes all creatures. As the embodiment of the earth she supports, protects, and mothers all beings. As śākambharī she provides the world with food from her own body \(11.45\). In her role as cosmic queen, warrior goddess, and demon slayer, Durgā in effect protects herself in her aspect as the earth itself. As immanent in the world Durgā is equated with the earth. As transcendent, she is the heavenly queen who descends from time to time to maintain harmony on earth.

Durgā’s association or identification with *śakti, māyā,* and *prakṛti* lends to the great demon-slaying goddess an immediate, tangible dimension. As an expression of these ideas she is identified with the creation itself. Her presence is affirmed to pervade and underlie the actual world in which people live, and her power and strength are affirmed to imbue all creatures with the will to prosper and multiply.
