+++
title = "03 Notes on Possession in the Rāmāyana"

+++
In striking contrast to the MBh, the Rāmāyaṇa does not comprehend or explicate a diversity of possession states. In the Rāmāyaṇa possession is employed entirely as a descriptor, sometimes as a metaphor of emotional engagement, not as an indicator of hostile or friendly takeover of a body by a spirit, deity, or yogin. This reflects the divergent nature of the two epics. The MBh is defined by its ambiguities of character and plot, of good and evil, and of dharma. It pits brother against brother, shaking the very foundations of culture, expectation, and familiarity. The Rāmāyaṇa, as many have noted before me, is the opposite of this; it is a story of brothers coming together, of clear resolution of evil.54 The good characters are always good, always the exemplars, while the bad are nearly always unambiguously bad. An unswerving honesty and straightforward moral nobility were inscribed into this epic, and these along with the story itself have never lost their appeal in India. Nevertheless, the later Sanskrit and regional language renditions and adaptations amplified and caricatured this morality, draining it of its heady immediacy, and stripped away much of the complexity of Vālmīki’s characters. This, however, only continued what Vālmīki began, as even in his great epic moral dilemmas were nipped in the bud. As for the characters, with the exception of a few unexpectedly friendly demons,55 the most complex characters, Sītā and Hanumān, extraordinary in the Sanskrit epic, were idealized and caricatured in the later versions.56

Unlike the MBh, the Rāmāyaṇa rarely presents its main characters in a state of moral uncertainty, ambiguity, or complexity; Rāma, perhaps, in a moment of doubt as to the fate of Sītād being the exception. Perhaps more important, personal identity was not constantly at stake in the Rāmāyaṇa; the characters were not penetrable or permeable in a manner that created moral ambiguity or self-alienation, as in the MBh. The attraction of simplicity, the constancy of defined character, and the imperative of maintaining established moral structures and historical validations are likely reasons the Rāmāyaṇa was preferred by vernacular literati57 over the MBh, in spite of several popular Sanskrit dramas depicting parts of the latter (e.g., Bhāsa’s Urubhaṇgam). As in the Rāmāyaṇa, the main elements of the plot of the Sanskrit MBh were, for the most part, retained in later classical literature (recall, however, that the Jain tale of Nala and Damayantī exorcised the possession), though in the latter these elements were heavily transfigured in the non-elite folk traditions, for example, in Tamilnadu and Garhwal, in a manner that intensified, rather than reduced, the pre-existing ambiguities, while in the former personal identities were rarely questioned even though the many Rāmāyaṇa variants were uniquely textured and contextualized, as A. K. Ramanujan astutely notes.58

It is important in this context to reiterate that these regional performative Mahābhāratas are replete with possession, as Hiltebeitel and Sax have shown. In the folk Rāmāyaṇas, however, as well as among kathavacaks or public performers and narrators of Tulsīdās’s Rāmcaritmānas, possession is observed only occasionally. Philip Lutgendorf reports on a kāthavācak named Ramnarayan Shukla active in Varanasi in the 1980s:

On occasion—usually a Tuesday or Saturday—while he is discoursing on the wonderful carit of Hanumān, he enters a state of intense excitement and begins twisting his head from side to side with a whiplash motion, his long hair flying about him. His face turns bright red and the veins and tendons in his neck bulge from the strain. The blurred image of his oscillating features suggests a religious calendar vision of a multiheaded deity, and like the deity, he seems to be speaking out of many mouths at once.59

A question that arises immediately is whether such possession is attributable exclusively to the modern demeanor and attitude (bhāva) taken by religious storytellers or whether it may be traceable to a more distant practice of possession in Rāmāyaṇa performance and tradition. The answer is both: Audiences expect a visible intensity of self-identification with the characters they portray, a self-identification that crosses the line into possession, as Ramanujan has noted. But there is also evidence that this is part of an acting tradition dating back several centuries, as we see (Chapter 9) in examining bhakti-induced possession.

It is tempting here to suggest a broad affinity between the practice of possession of Hanumān by Ramnarayan Shukla and the possession and exorcistic practices at Bālājī. Hanumān is clearly a deity whose connections to humans are felt to be closer than those of many other deities. He is the archetypal devotee, indeed the only devotee to be widely worshipped as a deity.60 As the primary deity of wrestlers he signifies physical strength, and is often depicted with the physique of a body-builder.61 He is also a healer, revered for his flight across Bharatavarṣa to acquire the sañjīvanī herb that cures the ailing Lakṣmaṣa in the Rāmāyaṇa. Thus, Hanumān is a paragon, an archetypal figure, of the three attributes of devotion, strength, and health. Perhaps of greater immediacy—and conceptually related to these attributes—is Hanumān’s oft-told exploit as a sojourner into the underworld to rescue the Ayodhyan princes, kidnapped and held prisoner there by Mahīrāvaṇa/Ahīrāvaṇa, a subterranean relative of Rāvaṇa’s. Although this tale has no textual basis in either the Rāmāyaṇa or the Rāmcaritmānas of Tulsīdās, it has wide popular currency and demonstrates to devotees across north India Hanumān’s adeptness “in the shadowy realms below the ground as he is soaring through the sky.”62 It is no wonder that as a thoroughly virtuous expert in shamanic travel he is invoked, even possessed, by devotees, wrestlers, healers, and those in need of otherworldly assistance, and that as Bālājī he presides over an ever-expanding horde of dūts who, like him, are healing spirits.

We should now survey the derivatives of the verbal root ā√viś in the Rāmāyaṇa and evaluate the extent to which these usages agree with the findings from the MBh. Most of the material betrays a range of emotive situations conceptually similar to those noted in the MBh: virility (vīryam āviveśa, 5.1.33), anger (krodha, manyu);63 delight, anger, and pity as a single unit (harṣo dainyaṃ ca roṣaś ca);64 brahman killing (brahmahatyā);65 psychic darkness (tamas);66 confusion (moha);67 fear (bhayam);68 and sorrow (śoko).69 In one instance pra√viś indicates entrance into a general state of ferocity and transgression: “In battle, the Indrajits were possessed [prāviśan] by great and fierce transgression” (6.80.4cd).70 Twice ā√viś refers to the action of arrows, weapons that penetrate deeply into both body and quiver: “Rāvaṇa’s son, victorious in battle, pierced his arrows firmly into all Rāma’s and Lakṣmaṇa’s critical bodily points” (sarvamarmabhidaḥ … āveśayāmāsa, 6.35.7). Later, in the same “War Book” (Yuddhakāṇḍa), we learn that “after killing Rāvaṇa, that arrow, soaked in blood, its job well-done, was again replaced [āviśat] in his quiver, as if undisturbed” (6.97.19). Beyond these examples, we find ā√viś in the sense of absorption into the precepts of dharma,71 and a concern with order (yathākramāveśita).72 These demonstrate that regulation from within or without was imposing to the point of possession. Similarly, wrapping oneself in armor (kavacam) was an imposing state of transformation tantamount to possession.73 Other states labeled possession are fainting (dharaṇyāṃ samupāviśat),74 sleep (nidrā) brought on by anxiety or exhaustion,75 and exhaustion (śrantā) itself.76 Twice in the Bālakāṇḍa it is employed in the sense of leaving a person or kingdom in the care of another, indicating that a shift of ownership or responsibility is a variety of possession.77 Like the MBh, the Rāmāyaṇa employs ā√viś to indicate entrance into the sky (ākāśa) and other “natural” places of emotional gravity. Several times ā√viś is used for entering, disappearing into, or flying through the sky; for example, “Kuśa went away, then became absorbed [āviśya] in the ethereal realm, the eternal brahmaloka” (1.33.4).78 Similarly, it may indicate arrival at important mountains such as Kailāśa,79 entering a forest,80 or seizing or occupying deeply meaningful constructed spaces, such as private chambers or citadels.81

In only one instance is it used for deity or spirit possession: In the Ayodhyākāṇḍa the townspeople, anonymously, of course, twitter among themselves as to the reasons why Daśaratha could have exiled his glorious son Rāma. One says, “Surely it is some spirit that has possessed [āviśya] Daśaratha and spoken today, for the king could never bring himself to exile his beloved son.”82 It is perhaps expected and significant that it is from the unnamed urban denizens, the hoi polloi, that possession makes a rare appearance in this epic, and at that only rumored.

It is also significant to note in this context that in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries the Hindu nationalist movements that have achieved widespread prominence hearken back to the Rāmāyaṇa rather than the MBh as their paradigmatic epic. These contemporary movements, like the Rāmāyaṇa, have expunged or censored much of popular religious praxis in favor of a more formal (and, not incidentally, upper-class), Śaṅkarized presentation. Recall Gombrich’s statement: “Later brahmanism, however, denied all value to possession states and they were screened out of brahmanical religion.”83 The Sanskrit epic of Vālmīki has a consistency that permits the censorship of which Gombrich speaks, while at the same time the diverse (and genuinely noncontested) regional forms of the epic have allowed popular religion, including possession, back into the epic, like water seeping into the cracks in a shiny but weather-beaten and scarred surface. Yet the pervasive and tremulous ambiguities of the MBh could never have allowed censorship into the text without denuding it practically beyond recognition. With the ambiguities and uncertainties of the text intact, it has become, for the most part, the dominant epic only sporadically throughout South Asia.
