+++
title = "01 Corpses and Cremation Grounds"

+++

Corpses are remarkably often associated with the Mahavidyas, and cremation grounds seem to be highly favored as places in which to worship them. Kali, T훮r훮, Bagalamukhi, Tripura-sundari, Matarigi, and Bhairavi are all said to stand or sit upon corpses. Kali, T훮r훮, Chinnamasta, and Dhumavati are often described or pictured as dwelling in cremation grounds. On several occasions the *Mantra-mahodadhih *stipulates that *sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor\) should be done while sitting on a corpse or on a place where a corpse has recently been buried. For example, in an almost matter-of-fact way, the text says: "Bringing a corpse on a Tuesday or Saturday, . . . bury it one foot deep in the ground beneath the door of the house. Then, sitting on that spot, . . . perform 108 Japas \[repetitions\] every day. . . . Through such a Japa for eight days the *\[sadhaka, *"adept"\] becomes the lord of various Siddhis \["perfections," magical powers\]."1 The same text, again, instructs the *sadhaka *as follows: "Sitting on a Savasana \[a corpse seat\] . . . the Sadhaka should begin the Japa at sunrise and continue it without break till the next sunrise.





Through such a \[process\] the Sadhaka becomes fearless and master of various Siddhis."2 In discussing the empowerment or perfection of mantras, which is accomplished primarily by repetition, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *says: "A Sadhaka who, sitting on a corpse, performs one lakh \(100,000\) \[repetitions\] of this mantra, his mantra becomes potent and all his cherished desires are soon fulfilled."3 In discussing the relative power of different "seats," the *Mantra-mahodadhih *describes the *komaldsana, *which uses an aborted fetus or the corpse of a five-year-old child, and the *vistardsana, *which is made of woven grass and "consecrated with a corpse."4 The *Tantrasdra, *a text devoted primarily to the Mahavidyas, has detailed descriptions of both *savd **sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor with a corpse\)5 and *citd **sadhand *\(spiritual endeavor on a cremation pyre\).6 These rituals are not described as applicable to a particular goddess among the Mahavidyas, so probably both techniques are appropriate in the worship of any, or at least several, of the Mahavidyas.

It is important to reflect on these associations if we wish to come to an understanding of certain individual Mahavidyas and of the group as a whole. As a group, they seem to be associated with a type of spirituality that relies heavily on death imagery. This is perhaps most explicit in the case of Kali, the first and most important of the group. But corpses and cremation grounds are central in descriptions of several of the other goddesses as well, and worship of nearly all of them is said to be most effective if undertaken in a cremation ground.

It is tempting to suppose that this death imagery belongs to the ascetic, world-denying vein of Hinduism, in which renunciation of worldly desire is central. In such a context, death imagery and death rituals make sense: they reinforce the renunciant's decision to pursue spiritual liberation by giving up the lures of the world. Meditation upon death puts worldly pleasures in a perspective where their attraction can be minimized or subverted altogether.7 And surely corpses and cremation grounds do play this role in Mahavidya *sadhand. *

The cremation ground also plays the role of a "forbidden thing," a kind of sixth *tattva, *which the heroic *sadhaka *must confront in order to glimpse the underlying nature of reality, which is that all things, no matter how polluted or terrible, are pervaded by *s'akti *\(energy or power\) \(see the chapter on Kali\). To meditate upon, to meditate in, or to live in a cremation ground functions as a spiritual test. In what has been termed the *"samadhi *\[heightened or intensified consciousness\] of horror,"8 the adept discovers a distaste for the world, which encourages him or her to see beyond or through its lures to underlying spiritual truths. The goddess herself is sometimes described as putting the male gods through similar tests. In the *Mahabhagavata-purana, *she assumes a terrible form to test Brahma, Visnu, and Siva. To avoid looking at her, Brahma turns his head away, and Visnu closes his eyes and plunges into the water. Only Siva is able to continue to gaze on her, and for this heroic ability she gives him the blessing of becoming a great yogi.9 In a similar scenario, the goddess appears to the three male gods as a rotting corpse. Siva thinks her stench is fragrant incense, and he takes her corpse on his breast. The goddess blesses him by placing his *Iirigam *in her yoni.10 The tantric *sadhaka *is tested, as it were, in the cremation ground. The challenge is for the spiritual aspirant to be able to perceive the presence of the goddess even in the most terrible and polluting objects and places.





There is some evidence that cremation grounds are sometimes used for initiation into certain tantric cults.11 Insofar as initiation rites often involve the symbolic death and rebirth of the initiate,12 a cremation ground seems an appropriate venue. It is a place of transformation, where people die to one mode of being and are born to another. It is the locale of the greatest human transformation, that from life to death. If the candidate's initiation into a tantric cult is meant to signify dramatic transformation, the cremation ground is a most suitable place for it.

However, something beyond this seems to be involved in the use of corpses and cremation grounds, for it is often clear that people undertaking these rituals are householders who have not renounced the world, are not engaged in ascetic practices, do not seem primarily concerned with affirming the underlying divinity of the forbidden or the polluted, and are not undergoing initiation into a tantric cult. It is also clear that the desires that motivate this type of spirituality are often worldly: power over one's enemies, kingly authority, eloquence in speech, and so on. The aim of this *sddbana, *that is, seems to be, not so much to triumph over the lures of the world or even to see through its illusory facade to its underlying reality as *sakti, *but rather to gain success and well-being in the world. Corpses and cremation grounds seem to function as more than dramatic reminders of the transience of worldly existence and the futility of physical and mental desires, and thus as appropriate accoutrements or contexts for the spiritual quest. They also seem to function as objects and places of power by means of which or in which extraordinary achievements may be accomplished. Power seems to accrue to the individual who associates with corpses and frequents cremation grounds. Why might this be so?

It is clear that texts describing the Mahavidyas and their worship assume the existence of a world of spirits that is parallel to the physical world and impinges upon it. This assumption persists in and to a great extent dominates contemporary Hinduism in both its popular and its refined, literary forms. The inhabitants of this world include gods, goddesses, *raksasas, **asuras, **vetdlas,yoginis, **ddkinis, **gandhai~vas, **kinnaras, **siddhas, **bhutas, **pretas, **pisacas, **ndgas, *and other classes of beings that are not visible under usual conditions but that appear from time to time in the physical world. All of these beings are more powerful than humans or have some ability or cunning that surpasses normal human abilities. Their eruptions into the visible world of human beings can be beneficial or harmful, unexpected or willed. Examples of harmful and unexpected eruptions are illnesses, bad luck, and accidents. These are often attributed to the actions of *bhutas *and *pretas *\(spirits of the dead, ghosts\), but also to other inimical spirits or deities. Such eruptions may result from either bad karma on the part of the victim \(who caused the disease by wicked deeds or thoughts\) or unsatisfied passions or desires on the part of the spirit being, who tries to fulfill them by possessing the human victim. Much of Hindu belief and practice concerns warding off or dealing with such inimical intrusions into human affairs.





On the other hand, another large part of Hindu ritual and practice deliberately seeks contact with this invisible world for a variety of purposes, and it is in this context that much tantric ritual probably should be understood. Tantric rituals in many cases are clearly aimed at crossing the barrier between the visible and invisible worlds, either by allowing the *sadhaka *to enter the spirit world or by enticing or forcing spirit beings to appear in the visible world. The goal of the *sadhaka *is often made explicit: to gain a blessing, usually in the form of some kind of power or ability, from a being in the spirit world, usually a deity, often one of the Mahavidyas. Contacting the spirit world deliberately \(as opposed to being contacted by it unexpectedly\) is also assumed to be both difficult and dangerous, and often terrifying. This is where the importance of corpses and cremation grounds becomes understandable in tantric worship.

Where might one hope to contact the unseen, spiritual world? Where might the barrier between the visible and invisible worlds be most permeable? One place is certainly the cremation ground. It is where all human beings eventually and inevitably make contact with the spirit world as they pass from life to death. Indeed, to a great extent this is precisely what death is, the transition from one mode of being to another, from that of a physical to a nonphysical being. The cremation ground is the "terminal" where such transitions routinely take place. In this sense, it represents a more-or-less-permanent "opening" to the spirit world and the beings that inhabit it. It is a place of spirit traffic, of coming and going from one world to another.13 It is a liminal place,14 betwixt and between worlds, where radical transformations take place and contact between worlds is relatively common.

Corpses, particularly of the recent dead, are vehicles with which one can move from one world to the other. A recently dead person, particularly if the proper death rituals have not yet been done, still hovers in the physical world while already having been transformed into a spirit being. He or she is a liminal being, with a foot in both worlds, as it were. He or she is on the way to the "other world"; to ride that person's corpse, or otherwise associate with or dominate it, is to make that transition also. References to reviving or gaining control over a corpse, or the spirit that inhabits it, are not infrequent. The *Uddisa-tantra *gives mantras for reviving a corpse.15 The *Kathasaritsagara *also mentions revitalizing corpses, gaining control over them in order to use them at will, and acquiring the ability to fly by eating human flesh.16 Elsewhere we read: "Dead and putrefying corpses submerged near cremation grounds are still brought to life by the force of the sadhaka's mantras, and made to render aid to sadhana and siddhi."17 These references make clear that a corpse is a numinous object particularly useful for making contact with the spirit world and acquiring powers and abilities associated with spirit beings.




