+++
title = "02 Skulls and Severed Heads"

+++

Another remarkable feature of Mahavidya iconography is the prevalence of skulls and chopped-off heads. Kali, Tārā, Chinnamasta, Matarigi, and Bhairavi all wear garlands of skulls or severed heads and are often said to hold a freshly cut head or a skull in their hands. Skulls also adorn Tara's forehead and sometimes Kali's hair. Some texts devoted to worship of the Mahavidyas also prescribe skulls as seats upon which effective *sadhana *may be performed. The *Mantra-mahodadhih *stipulates that the *sadhaka *should bring a human skull to a remote place in the woods, purify it, bury it, and perform worship while seated on that spot.18 The most dramatic example of a chopped-off head in the context of the Mahavidyas, of course, is that of Chinnamasta, who has severed her own head. Although I commented upon the significance of skulls and choppedoff heads in the discussion of Chinnamasta,19 their prevalence among the Mahavidyas generally deserves further comment.

Perhaps the most obvious interpretation of these skulls and heads concerns head offerings. Animal \(and sometimes human\) sacrifice was fairly common in the Hindu tradition, and the typical way of killing the victim was by decapitation. During the Vedic period, animal sacrifices were commonly offered to many deities; later, most blood sacrifices were directed to goddesses. In contemporary Hinduism, which continues a tradition that is hundreds of years old, blood sacrifice is still almost invariably associated with certain goddesses. At some goddess temples, daily sacrifices are made, usually of goats and chickens. In almost all cases the animal's head is cut off and offered to the image of the goddess, often on a platter. The *Tantrasara *devotes a section to *ball, *"blood sacrifice," and makes it clear that the proper method of killing the victim \(which according to the text may be a human being\) is by decapitation.20 The chopped-off heads that several of the Mahavidyas wear or sit upon can be thought of as sacrificial offerings. That these human heads are always male in Mahavidya iconography is still reflected in contemporary practice, which uses male animals almost exclusively.





Another interpretation of skulls and severed heads also seems possible, however, and is more in line with the importance of corpses and cremation grounds in Mahavidya worship and iconography. The severed head \(or skull\), especially when worn as an ornament by one of the Mahavidya goddesses, might be thought of as symbolic of transformed consciousness. By means of spiritual exercises in the cremation ground and with corpses, the *sddhaka *seeks a direct encounter with the spirit world in order to acquire powers associated with spirit beings: superior power, or even omnipotence; expanded knowledge, or omniscience; transcendence of time and space, including precognition and clairvoyance; and the ability to change form at will, to become small or light, or to fly.21 In short, the adept seeks to transcend in some manner the limitations of the physical, earth-bound human condition by direct association with the spirit world.

That these spirit powers often denote transcendence of corporeal limitations and the expansion of consciousness, the ability of the consciousness to drift free of the body and roam at will, suggests a divorce of body and mind, the liberation of the mind from the body. Those chopped-off heads and skulls might be symbolic of *sddhakas *who, by a particular goddess's blessing or their own efforts, have accomplished these feats. They might be thought of as symbolic of transformed consciousness in two ways: First, they have achieved the status of spirit beings by having died; the theme of symbolic death in many religions functions in just this way, namely, to dramatically denote a drastic change in status.22 Second, the severed heads may denote consciousness that has transcended the limitations of physical, worldly existence: the mind \(symbolized by the head\) has left the body and is no longer attached to or limited by it.

A common motif in the world's religions is the quest by a spiritual master to acquire techniques for transcending the human condition. The shaman and the mystic are examples of this. Both undertake spiritual journeys to achieve an unmediated and transformative experience of the spirit world, and to achieve it they must often undergo a symbolic death and dismemberment. The shaman is often said to be torn asunder by spiritual beings, who then reconstitute his or her body with indestructible pieces, signifying a new, transcendent condition. Just such a dismemberment was described by Pagal Haranath \(b. 1865\), a Bengali Vaisnava. While traveling in Kashmir, he fell into a deep trance. Caitanya, the famous Bengali Vaisnava reformer, appeared to him, divided his body into sixty-four parts, and then proceeded to clean and purify them. When his body was reassembled, Haranath had acquired magical, shamanic powers, that is, expanded consciousness.23





Mystics often pass through a "dark night of the soul," in which they feel as if they have died, before experiencing the bliss of union with the divine. In the cremation ground, in association with corpses, tantric *sddhakas *undergo a symbolic death before entering the spirit world, where they are reconstituted as spiritual beings equipped with spiritual powers that go beyond the limitations of earthly existence. The severed heads that the goddesses wear might signify both the symbolic death and the transcendent consciousness of successful *sadhakas. *That all of these chopped-off heads seem to wear a look of peace and satisfaction seems to confirm this interpretation.


