+++
title = "03 Sexuality and Awakened Consciousness"

+++

Mahavidya iconography, mythology, worship, and ritual are dominated by implicit and explicit sexual symbolism. Sexual intercourse is explicitly portrayed in the *dhydna *mantras and portraits of Kali, Chinnamasta, and Tara,24 and most of the individual Mahavidyas are described as sexually attractive and powerful. The mythology concerning the origin of certain individual Mahavidya goddesses \(for example, Chinnamasta and Matarigi\) stresses sexual tension. The yantras that represent the Mahavidyas contain implicitly sexual symbols, and the central metaphor of awakening *kundalini **sakti *may be interpreted as the arousal of sexual energy. It is also the case that most of the Mahavidyas may be worshiped through the *panca **tattva *ritual, in which sexual intercourse is the culminating act. The centrality of sexual imagery in Mahavidya worship and iconography deserves further comment and analysis at this point. Sexual imagery in Mahavidya materials must be related to the tantric philosophy and ritual that are its primary religious context. This imagery can be understood on several different, but related, levels. On the most abstract level, sexual imagery reflects the tantric vision of reality as the dynamic interaction and tension between the two great principles, Siva and Satki. As the basic underlying principles of reality, the basic components of the essential texture of the cosmos, Siva and Sakti obviously may be understood in a wide variety of ways. Several sophisticated philosophical systems have been constructed on the meaning and interpretation of these two principles, Kashmir Saivism perhaps being the most impressive. Siva and Sakti are present in the mutual attraction and complementarity of the sexes. At the level of human existence and human relationships, they are inherent and embodied in individual males and females. In the context of Tantra, sexual attraction, sexual behavior, and sexual intercourse suggest the underlying texture of reality, which is the manifestation of the dynamic, energetic, creative, and harmonious interaction of Siva and Sakti.





At a more concrete, but still fairly coded, level, sexual imagery suffuses the yantras and *mandalas *associated with all of the Mahavidya goddesses \(as it does tantric *mandala *structure and symbolism generally\). The dominant forms of the yantra—the triangle and the lotus—both have sexual connotations. The triangle, particularly when it is pointing downward, is symbolic of the vulva. An upward-pointing triangle is sometimes held to represent the phallus. When the two are superimposed on each other, as in most of the yantras representing the individual Mahavidyas, they denote sexual union. Another feature of yantra design is the presence of a small dot, called a *bindu, *in the very center of the diagram. This dot is often said to represent either the two principles of Siva and Sakti in union or the male seed, particularly when it is enclosed in a downward-pointing triangle at the center of the yantra. The lotus also has sexual connotations. It is often a symbol of generation, that from which all creation proceeds or that in which all creation is contained. As it opens and blossoms, the cosmos emerges. In this sense it represents the womb from which the world is born and may be associated with the womb or sexual organ of Sakti, from whom creation emerges and in whom it is contained.

The yantras representing the Mahavidyas are also charged with a group of powers—male and female deities—who are located at various points in the design. The *sadhaka *places these powers in the yantra while either drawing or imagining it during *sadhand. *In many of the Mahavidya yantras, the petals of the inner lotus are charged with the presence of different forms of Rati and Kama, deities associated in particular with sexual vitality and desire. In general structure, then, the Mahavidya yantras may be understood as schematic renderings of sexual imagery and containers of sexual power. As schematic representations of both the goddess in question and the cosmos generally, which she is held to embody, the yantra again expresses the idea that reality in its basic nature is sexually charged.





The yoni, in turn, is interpreted as a yantra. It is said to contain, in essential form, all aspects of the cosmos in microcosm. The *Yoni-tantra, *in describing yoni *piija, *says that the yoni is a manifestation of the Devi \(the Great Goddess\). The Devl, furthermore, is said to manifest herself in the form of the Mahavidyas. Each of the Mahavidyas is identified with a different part of the yoni.25

In Mahavidya iconography, sexual imagery is often explicit. Kali and Tārā are sometimes shown copulating with Siva; a copulating couple, usually identifiable as Kama and Rati, figures in Chinnamasta and Tārā iconography. Sexual motifs and activity also figure prominently in certain tantric rituals associated with the Mahavidyas. In the *panca **makara *or *panca **tattva *ritual, the culminating act, the fifth *makara, *is *maithuna, *in which the *sadhaka *and his *sakti *perform sexual intercourse. This act as described in the *Tantrasara *is highly ritualized.26 It involves the careful purification of many elements and a lengthy worship by the *sadhaka *of his female companion \(the text is written from the male point of view\). Some interpreters have suggested that the primary aim of the ritual is for the *sadhaka *to demonstrate that he has mastered his sexual desires. They claim that the male does not ejaculate during intercourse but redirects his semen "upward" or inward, thereby controlling and channeling his sexual energy to achieve spiritual ends.27 In the *Tantrasara, *however, it is clear that the man ejaculates into the woman; as he does so, he says a particular prayer comparing his ejaculation to an offering: "The fire *oiatman *has been made blazing by the offering of clarified butter; by means of my mind ladle I am ever engaged in offering the modality of my senses through the *susimmd *channels."28 This utterance implies, not that the *sadhaka *withholds his semen, but that he interprets his ejaculation as part of a process that awakens *kundalini**sakti. *It is not sublimated or curbed sexual activity that awakens the *kundalini*"but sexual activity properly understood or perhaps properly appreciated.29

Sexual imagery in Mahavidya iconography and worship plays a symbolic role. It may be understood metaphorically as suggesting the dynamic polar rhythm of reality, the interaction of Siva and Sakti that creates and suffuses the cosmos. The *Kularnava-tantra *says that the world does not bear the likeness of the *cakra, *the lotus, or the thunderbolt but rather the likeness of the *lirigam *and yoni, thus reflecting the form of Siva and Sakti; wherever there is the union of the two, "the devotee experiences deep trance *\[samadbi\]."30 *Sexual imagery may also symbolize awakening consciousness. The rising of *kundalini**sakti *and the bliss of her union with Siva in the *sahasrdra **cakra *may be symbolized by sexual union. Sexual activity seems an appropriate metaphor for the rousing of the *kundalini, *as both are highly energetic processes accompanied by heightened awareness. It seems likely that in some cases sexual imagery reflects actual practice, as in the *panca **tattva *ritual, where sexual intercourse may be used as a means of awakening *kundalini **sakti. *Substitutes may be used in the ritual, however, which implies that sexual intercourse is not necessary to the awakening of the *kundalini. *Tantric texts sometimes warn that only those of a certain accomplished character and heroic nature should engage in this ritual. To suggest that explicit sexual activity is a necessary part of Mahavidya worship would be an exaggeration. On the other hand, sexual practices clearly have a role, and for some *sadhakas *in some situations, sexual intercourse may lead to an intense spiritual experience.




