+++
title = "04 The Conjunction of Death and Sexual Imagery"

+++

It is striking that imagery of both sex and death should be so central in Mahavidya materials and that both are so often juxtaposed in the characterization of a goddess and in certain rituals of worship. Kali, Tārā, and Chinnamasta, in particular, often combine both types of imagery in their icons. In an eighteenth-century Kangra painting, Tārā stands on Kama and Rati, who are copulating on a cremation fire.31 Kali is sometimes shown copulating with Siva in a cremation ground,32 and Chinnamasta decapitates herself while standing or sitting on Rati, who is having sexual intercourse with Kama. It is not unusual for the copulating couple on whom Chinnamasta stands or leans to be lying on a cremation fire. There are also examples of Chinnamasta having intercourse with Siva while he lies on a cremation pyre and she decapitates herself \(see figure 24\).

These are only the most dramatic examples of the juxtaposition of death and sexual imagery. Certain Mahavidya texts prescribe equally shocking juxtapositions in their descriptions of rituals appropriate to Mahavidya worship. In its section on Tārā, for example, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *says that the *sadhaka *who seeks lordship should sit naked on the heart of a corpse in a cremation ground and offer the goddess one thousand flowers, each covered with his semen, while reciting her mantra.33 The same section of the text describes a ritual in which the *sadhaka *should imagine the goddess seated on the chest of a corpse engaged in sex with her consort on a fifteen-petaled lotus while the *sadhaka *is also having sexual intercourse.34 Also in the section on Tārā, the *Mantra**mahodadhih *mentions a ritual in which the *sadhaka *places a human skull at the place where he is to recite the goddess's mantra. Then, while repeating the mantra, he is to gaze upon, touch, and sexually enjoy 2 woman.35 The *Uddisa-tantra *gives directions for improving the erotic appeal of a woman, which are followed immediately by rules governing *sava **sadhana *\(spiritual endeavor using a corpse\).36





What might this juxtaposition of sex and death imagery mean? I would suggest two interpretations. First, tantric *sadhana, *which is so intimately associated with Mahavidya worship, places a premium upon direct, unmediated experience. As mentioned above, tantric *sadhana *is secret and private. It is undertaken by an individual in a lonely place. Priests are not necessary, and while the *sddhaka's *guru may be present, or the *sadhaka *may take part in a collective ritual on rare occasions, it is primarily a lone adept who undertakes the rituals described in Mahavidya and related tantric texts. The texts are also explicit concerning at least one of the aims *of **sadhana: *to become one with the deity being worshiped, or to be blessed with a vision of the deity—a transformative and probably intense experience. We may typify the tantric *sadhaka *as someone who seeks concrete religious experience, for whom rituals are a means to experiencing an intensity of feeling and emotion. Both dying and sex are overwhelming human experiences that can leave a person uprooted from and unprotected by social conventions and ritual insulation. Both, of course, are highly ritualized in almost every culture, precisely because the intense emotions they engender are so apt to cause social disruption. But no amount of ritual can guarantee the taming or orderly channeling of either of these basic human experiences. It is the "explosive" nature of death and sex imagery that makes them so central in tantric *sadhana, *which puts such a premium on achieving transformative religious experiences. As symbols they are particularly powerful in evoking feelings that can deeply affect and alter a person; they can trigger the kind of experience the *sadhaka *seeks.

Second, the juxtaposition of death and sex imagery appropriately expresses the nature of reality as constant and simultaneous inceptioncreation and destruction. The waxing and waning of all beings and all things, from individual organisms to the infinite cosmos itself, is appropriately suggested in the simultaneous presentation of sex and death imagery. If such juxtaposed imagery shocks us, it is because we are in the habit of masking the destructive dimension of reality so insistently that its inevitable appearance is upsetting. That sex and death imagery "do not belong together," that we find the juxtaposition in "bad taste," is simply an admission that our view of reality is warped and unrealistic. Those Mahavidya goddesses who juxtapose sex and death imagery are icons of revelation to the *sddhaka, *who seeks an expanded consciousness, an awareness of the truth of things that does not pander to wishful thinking concerning one's own mortality and frailty. They are images that help the *sddhaka *tear the veil *oimdyd *\(illusion grounded in self-infatuation\).




