+++
title = "05 The Roles of Women and Reverence for Women"

+++

It is striking how central female imagery and women are in Mahavidya and related tantric materials. Theologically, the goddess, or Sakti, in one form or another is equal or superior to a male deity or principal, usually Siva. She is usually identified with the origin of the cosmos and is said to infuse it and contain it. Frequently in Mahadevi texts she empowers the male gods to create, maintain, and consume the creation, or she undertakes these functions herself. Iconographically, the individual Mahavidya goddesses are shown dominating male deities. Kali and Tārā stand on, sit on, or have sex astride Siva. Other Mahavidyas sit on male corpses. Tripura-sundari sits on the body of Siva, which in turn rests on a couch whose legs are four male deities. None of the Mahavidyas is shown in the role of a traditional Hindu wife or consort. Even Laksml, who is widely known for her loyal and subservient position as Visnu's wife, is shown alone. It is also noteworthy that the severed heads that decorate the goddesses' bodies are male, as are the corpses that lie beneath them. When animal sacrifice is included in worship, male animals are offered.

Moreover, Mahavidya and related tantric texts often mention the importance of revering women.37 The *Kauldvali-tantra *says that all women should be looked upon as manifestations of the Mahadevi \(great goddess\).38 The *Nila-tantra *says that one should desert one's parents, guru, and even the deities before insulting a woman.39





Several rituals involve the worship of individual women. At several points in the*panca **tattva *ritual, particularly during *maithuna, *the *sadhaka *does elaborate worship of his *sakti. *According to the description of the ritual in the *Tantrasdra, *he begins by mentally worshiping the goddess and several different groups of women: dancing girls, Kapalikas \("those who bear skulls," a particular type of religious adept\), prostitutes, and women of the barber, washerman, and cowherd castes.40 These groups are all either low caste or socially or religiously liminal. It is from one of these groups that the *sadhaka *recruits the woman who is to be his *sakti *in the ritual. The significance of the low-caste or liminal status of these women may relate to a general theme of the ritual, which affirms as sacred what is ordinarily viewed as forbidden or polluting and uses it to worship the goddess, who pervades all things. By worshiping women of lower castes, or women who are socially or religiously marginal, the adept reverses the normal hierarchy of respect. By revering such women, he affirms their underlying and essential divinity as concrete manifestations of the goddess. He affirms as divine that which is normally disdained or shunned.41

During the rituals directly related to *maithuna, *the theme of worshiping the woman as the goddess is persistent. Having performed *bhiita **suddhi *and *nyasa *on her body to purify and divinize the woman, the *sadhaka *directs her to sit on a bed, which he then worships as a *pith **a *of the goddess. This sacred spot is imagined to be the center of the world and is pictured as a lotus supported by the cosmic serpent in the depths of the cosmic ocean. On the lotus sits the goddess, represented by the *sadhaka''s **sakti. *The *sadhaka *then worships the woman's body: By means of mantras, he "deposits" in her limbs the five forms of Kama-deva, the god of sexual desire. Again using mantras, he divinizes her breasts or empowers them with sacred energy by "depositing" there the deities Vasanta \(who personifies the amorous season of spring\) and Kama. Her forehead is imagined to have the moon adorning it \(as is the case with many of the Mahavidya goddesses\), and both her right and left sides are imagined as suffused with divine beings. The *sadhaka *then worships her vagina, which should be seen to have three channels, representing the moon, sun, and fire. From the moon channel flows water, from the sun channel flows menstrual fluid, and from the fire channel, which is in the middle, flows seed. He should then worship the two goddesses Bhagamala and Bhagamalini \(both names mean "having a garland of yonis"\), in addition to his own chosen deity, as residing in the *saktfs *vagina.42 He should also at this point worship his own penis as representing Siva. In short, the *sadhaka * ritually transforms sexual intercourse into a cosmic event that unites Siva and Sakti.





Some tantric texts also mention ritual worship of a woman preceding sexual intercourse outside the context *of **the **panca **tattva *ritual, which suggests that the tantric *sadhaka *should routinely view intercourse as a sacred ritual in which or by which one realizes one's cosmic identity. The *Guptasadhand-tantra, *for example, directs the adept to worship his wife, or the wife of another, by washing her feet with water, then worshiping her forehead, face, throat, heart, navel, breasts, and vagina by repeating one hundred mantras of his chosen deity. At the time of ejaculation, the *sadhaka *is to offer his semen to Siva and imagine the *sakti *as his chosen deity.43 The *Kubjikd-tantra, *similarly, instructs the *sadhaka, *outside the context of the *panca **tattva *ritual, to worship his wife while she is drunk and lying on a bed. He is to view her as a goddess and, while repeating mantras, should touch her heart with his heart, her vagina with his penis, and her face with his face, thus symbolizing the uniting of Siva and Sakti.44

The *Yogini-tantra *says that yoni *Mid, *worship of the vulva, is the best of all methods of worship.45 The *Kdmdkhyd-tantra *instructs the *sadhaka *to worship the goddess in the genitals of his *sakti.46 *The *Mdyd-tantra *enjoins the adept to imagine his chosen deity residing in the yoni of a woman "who is not his own" in order to obtain perfection.47 The *Sarvolldsa-tantra *of Sarvananda, citing the *Vrhad-yoni-tantra, *discusses the downwardpointing triangle, the symbol of the yoni, as containing Brahma, Visnu, and Siva on its three sides, and also most of the Mahavidyas. In short, the text says, the triangle is the Great Goddess herself, the abode of all deities. Kali is said to dwell on all three sides of the triangle, which is identical with the yoni. Tārā is above it, Bhuvaneśvarī and Tripura-sundari are inside it, Bhairavi is at its root. Chinnamasta abides inside the hole in the triangle, and at the end \(perhaps deep within\) dwells Dhumavati, who emerges from there \(perhaps with menstrual flow\).48 At the root of the hair of the yoni dwells Mahakali, while Matarigi resides in the folds of skin below the navel. Covering the whole area are Kamala and Kamakhya.49 The same text, citing the *Vrhad-yoni-tantra, *also equates the yoni with sacred *tirthas *\("crossings," or holy places\), specifically certain holy rivers and ponds.50 The text also says that worship of the yoni earns one the merit ordinarily obtained by making arduous pilgrimages to holy places, because the yoni itself contains all their sacred power.51

Another common ritual in which females are revered is *kumdri **pujd.52 *In this ritual, prepubescent or virgin girls are offered *pujd *and fed. In this case, females from high castes, usually Brahmans, are sometimes specified, while other texts say girls from any caste are suitable. This ritual is not specifically tantric or associated with the Mahavidyas, although it occurs in tantric and Mahavidya materials. It is often done today during Durga Puja, the great autumn festival in honor of Durga. The underlying theme of individual females representing the pervasive divine female principle is again clearly expressed through this ritual.





That some of these rituals may not suggest reverence for women at all, but are simply examples of males setting up women as objects of sexual lust, is of course possible. Mainstream Hindu society has roundly criticized such tantric practices as excuses for sexual indulgence. It is clear, however, that these rituals fit a highly sophisticated general philosophy or theology of reality, and it is therefore unfair to suggest that they are undertaken solely for sexual gratification or involve the implicit or explicit abuse of women.

In some tantric traditions, women are said to be transmitters of doctrine, to play the role of teacher or guru. An example is the Pascimamnaya Kaula tradition, which flourished in Kashmir and Nepal. According to the *Manthana-bhairava-tantra *of this school, no distinction whatsoever should be made between the guru and the *yogini *\(female practitioner\).



The secret of all the scripture, the supreme essence of the oral tradition, is on the lips of the yogini. Thus she is venerated as the Supreme Power which bestows bliss \[knowledge\] of the innate nature of things. . . . The yogini is the womb from which the enlightened yogi is born and her mouth, from which issues the tradition, is the sacred matrix *\(yoni\). *... As the womb *\(yoni\) *of creation, it is the Lower Mouth *\(ardhovaktra\) *which is the essence of Kaula doctrine.53



In the Pascimamnaya school, Siva originally revealed the teachings to *theyoginis, *who subsequently handed them down from generation to generation.54 The implication here is that women, at least in this particular tantric tradition, have played an important, even central, role as sources of tantric instruction. According to the *Guptasddhand-tantra, *initiation by a female guru leads to the achievement of all desires and is the initiate's great good fortune.55 The *Prdnatosini, *citing the *Rudraydmala, *discusses the conditions under which a female guru might perform initiation, and also the qualities that such a woman should possess. It is clear, in short, that females were gurus in at least some tantric cults.56

Even though goddesses play a central role in much tantric literature, particularly in Mahavidya texts; even though women are said to be revered generally in some tantric texts and are often worshiped as individuals; and even though in at least one tantric tradition women are said to be the source and transmitters of doctrine, it is not clear to what extent the Mahavidya materials, or even the related tantric materials, express female spirituality. The texts in most cases take a male point of view and seem to be written by males for males. Women are often described as objects of the male subjects, and the *sadhaka *is assumed to be male and his partner female. The rituals are described from his point of view.





Because the texts are preoccupied with goddesses, female imagery, and women, and usually view the female in a positive or affirmative fashion, and because we know that women were sometimes teachers and full participants in tantric *sadhana, *it is possible that the spirituality described in tantric texts reflects women's religious experience as well as men's. Miranda Shaw has argued in the case of Buddhist Tantrism that the "male gaze," and male spirituality generally, might be understood to reflect female experience as well, insofar as women teach, fully participate in rituals with males, and sometimes write tantric texts.57 The same may be the case in Hindu Tantrism,58 and in Mahavidya worship specifically. While men wrote the great majority of tantric texts, it is possible that women wrote some of them, since they were sometimes teachers. It is also possible, as Shaw has argued for Buddhist Tantra, that male spirituality, as reflected in texts written by males, might be informed by female religious experience, especially in cases where both sexes were full participants in tantric rites. Thus far, however, I have been unable to find Hindu tantric texts that explicitly discuss or describe tantric rites from a female point of view. During my research I asked scholars and informants if they knew of any materials on the Mahavidyas, or any Hindu tantric materials, that were written by, for, or about females. No one did.

This does not mean that such texts do not exist. Miranda Shaw's recent work on tantric Buddhism is sobering in this respect, illustrating how female sources have been almost entirely ignored by scholars of Buddhism. It seems unlikely that scholars of Hinduism have been any more assiduous than scholars of Buddhism in seeking female-authored texts or accounts of female spirituality. We can only hope that female-authored Hindu tantric texts will come to light in the near future.




