+++
title = "01 The Śaiva and Buddhist Tantras and the South Indian Texts"

+++
The Himalayan Śaiva and Buddhist Tantras that mention svasthāvesa are primarily dedicated to descriptions of the worship of Śiva and various goddesses. The Śaiva texts fall within a class called Siddhānta, rather than under the better-known but highly suspect designation “Kashmir Saivism.”3 Thus, the texts are not the commonly cited ones (by Abhinavagupta, Kṣemarāja, Utpaladeva, and their predecessors), but the lesser-known Jayadrathayāmala, Tantrasadbhāva, Sekoddeśa, Niśvāsaguhya, Bṛhatkālottara, and Cakrasaṃvarapiṇḍārtha.4 None of these except the Sekoddesa has been edited or published;5 the remaining ones exist in manuscript form only and have been examined almost solely by Alexis Sanderson.6 These texts undoubtedly represent but a few of what must have been a much greater number of Sanskrit texts that mentioned this and other similar apotropaic rituals current at the time. What is striking about svasthāvesa, and what occupies us here in part, is the remarkable continuity of these texts with certain early Chinese Buddhist tantric texts cited by Edward L. Davis in his recent volume Society and the Supernatural in Song China and Michel Strickmann in Mantras et Mandarins and, much more extensively, in Chinese Magical Medicine,7 as well as in later manuscripts written in Sanskrit and mixed Sanskrit and Telugu in South India dating to perhaps seven or eight centuries later.

This broad conformity sparks several questions. Were specific possession cults transnational? Was Asian, especially Indian, religion organized along more microscopic definitions of lineage than I had hitherto believed? And if so, what sorts of identifiable historical forces could account for this organization? These were just some of the questions I began asking of this material. I cannot claim to provide fully satisfactory answers to all these questions, but I hope here to initiate the process of determining them.

Among my most frustrating, though not unexpected, discoveries in the course of working on this project is that Sanskrit texts dedicated wholly to deity or spirit possession are relatively few in number. Given the ritual nature of most possession, I optimistically hoped to find practical guides (prayogas, paddhatis) on ritual invocation of possession. These, I anticipated, would resemble other nontheoretical ritual texts in form and composition. Although it appears that such texts were rarely composed, they were surely written in greater numbers than the available evidence from manuscript catalogues suggests. A perusal of the available volumes of the New Catalogus Catalogorum (NCC) reveals just four manuscripts with the word āveśa in the title. All these manuscripts are housed in Chennai, in the Adyar Library and the Government Oriental Manuscripts Library (GOML).8 Three of these, including two of which are very revealing and fairly complete, are in Telugu script. The other is in Grantha, a variety of Tamil script that better reflects Sanskrit. To this must be added eight manuscripts from the recently published Descriptive Catalogue of Sanskrit Manuscripts. Volume XVI: Tantra Mantra Sāstram of the Oriental Research Institute (ORI) in Mysore. All of the Chennai and Mysore manuscripts are prayogas, though most of them are fragmentary or incomplete. In the Mysore collection, four single-folio palm leaf manuscripts in Nāgarī script appear to be copies of a prototype. Another, slightly longer, is in Tamil script, while the three longest and most detailed are in Telugu script.9

This small number, given the vast quantity of tantric and agamic ritual ephemera, suggests that most of these manuscripts did not survive precisely because they were “ephemeral.” They probably existed only in locally produced “chapbooks” that were not, on the whole, deemed sufficiently important or respectable to hand over to manuscript libraries.10 It is likely, however, that a fair amount of material on possession, and probably svasthāvesa, remains buried in collections of unexamined tantric manuscripts housed in personal and institutional libraries in various parts of India, especially in the south. Most of the recognized (and published) tantric literature in South India is dakṣiṇācāra (literature of the “right-handed path”). This “path” and its literature eventually became dominant in Tamilnadu, Karnataka, and much of southern and coastal Andhra Pradesh because of its support by the Śaṇkarācāryas, who authorized the domestication and transformation of “left-handed” practices involving Tripurā and other goddesses, assigning them an advaitic and, therefore, “right-handed” trajectory.”11 Nevertheless, an appreciable quantity of vāmācāra material was permitted within rather wide latitudes of secret teachings. Among these culturally and textually subcutaneous practices were strategies for inducing oracular possession, which was regarded by the brahmanical orthodoxies as “folk” or “popular” practice, even when brahmans participated in them as fully as others. Notable among these “others” were women and people of lower social rank, whose social and religious orbit brahmans supposedly did not frequent. Many of these practices were considered indelicate and potentially polluting, even menacing, by certain segments of the brahmanical orthodoxy. Thus, their social locus encouraged their secrecy. This marginalization included manuscripts as well, which were rarely distributed outside small communities of practitioners. I know from my own experience and that of Indian scholars with whom I have spoken that certain individuals allegedly holding manuscripts on possession and other vāmācāra topics have refused to hand them over to libraries or have even destroyed them after they have learned that scholars have suspected them of owning such manuscripts. They have been kept secret because their contents are regarded as dangerous, polluting, and unbrahmanical. This has occurred in South India, including Andhra Pradesh.

I mention this state because the most complete Sanskrit manuscripts on āveśa that I have thus far been able to locate, in the NCC and the Mysore catalogue, are in Telugu script and thus from Andhra Pradesh.12 The other relatively complete and seemingly intact manuscripts are in Grantha and Tamil scripts, thus from Tamilnadu. The most important manuscript I am aware of is a collection of āveśa sections in Telugu script culled from various Tantras.13 One section is titled Āveśabhairavamantraḥ and another is called Bhairavāveśaḥ. Neither have colophons, thus we do not know their provenance. Another section is described as the tenth paṭala of the Dakṣiṇakālikāgama, while another, titled Āveśakālikāmantraḥ, is recorded as the fifth paṭala of the Vetālatantra. An apparent addendum to this, possibly also from the Vetālatantra, is titled Bhūtāveśakramaḥ.14 The very existence of this manuscript suggests that a paṇḍit or tantric practitioner (or both) took an interest in this topic, at least to the extent of collecting various accounts of it, almost certainly for performative purposes.

One of the Telugu manuscripts that I have examined, housed in the GOML, states in its colophon that it is the third chapter (paṭala) of a text called Sudarśanasaṃhitā. Complete manuscripts of this text (in Telugu script) are housed in the ORI in Mysore,15 the Academy of Sanskrit Research in Melkote, and Sampūrṇānanda Saṃskṛta Viśvavidyālaya in Varanasi,16 while scattered chapters of it are found in the libraries of the University of Pennsylvania,17 the GOML, and (very likely) in many private libraries. I have examined the Pennsylvania manuscript, which is troublesome and corrupt18 and have found certain affinities between it and the Chennai manuscript. Although the Pennsylvania manuscript is in Nāgarī script and may be from Maharashtra, the compositional style, diction, liberal sprinkling of bija mantras, and subject matter dealing with an obscure aspect of vāmācāra Tantra (worship of Kārtavīryārjuna) reveal a respectable similarity to the Chennai manuscript. The colophon in the Pennsylvania manuscript states that it is the twelfth paṭala of the Sudarśanasaṃhitā,19 suggesting that this text is a loose compilation of tantric ephemera.20 Of the remaining manuscripts that I am currently examining, the ORI catalogue lists three composed on palm leaf, one in Grantha, and two in Telugu script. An extract from one of the Telugu manuscripts appears in the appendix to the catalogue. It is called Hanumaddīpavidhiḥ (Injunctions on the Light of Hanumān) and is identified, according to the colophon, as the twentieth paṭala of the Sudarśanasaṃhitā.21 An apparently related fragment from the GOML, discussed below, is identified as the third paṭala of this text, called Āñjaneya Āveśavidhiḥ (Injunctions to Induce Possession of Āñjaneya).22 It is important to mention this here, because Hanumān has emerged as one of the primary deities for possession in India, especially in his five-faced (pañcamukhi) form.23
