+++
title = "04 The Ritual of Svasthāveśa"

+++
With this in mind, then, let us now turn again, briefly, to the Śaiva and Buddhist Tantras and to the ritual employment of the prasenā. The Niśvāsaguhya, the Tantrasadbhāva, the Cakrasaṃvarapiṇḍārtha, the Sekoddeśa, the Bṛhatkālottara, and, most importantly, the Jayadrathayāmala (JY), the latest and most compendious of these texts, present a complex intertextuality.68 So, it is fair to present a composite account of the ritual of svasthāveśa.

The texts state that the prasenā is a divinatory form assumed by a female deity (vidya) that appears before the practitioner during a ritual performed at a site sacred to Maheśvara (rudrasthāna) or in a temple to the goddess (mātṛgṛham). The practitioner, called mantrin, māntrika, or simply sādhaka, repeats (japa) relevant mantras one hundred, one hundred and eight, one hundred thousand, or five hundred thousand times. This empowers him to undertake the āvesa. In these Tantras this ritual is always presented by Śiva, sometimes called Bhairava, as a great and wondrous secret, in response to queries from his dialogic counterpart, the Goddess, who is given a large number of names. As a result of these mantra repetitions, a conjunction (saṃyoga) is forged with a prasenā, classified as a Vidyā or Mahāvidyā goddess. This assumes a kind of communication, in which the mantrin either becomes fully identified with the prasenā or gains control of her. The JY declares that the mantrin possesses a special reverence, which is a result of meditation properly performed on this highest śakti (feminine energy). In a statement reminiscent of later Tibetan esoteric Buddhist initiatory practice, the JY states that this śakti arises in one’s belly on the disk of the moon, and it is here that the mantrin accesses her, in waves.69 The practitioner becomes established in a divine body (divyakāyasthitaḥ) and is able to perceive the expanded significance of a single point (bindumandiram).

There is apparently not just one standard prasenā but, potentially, many. These prasenās prevent the ill effects of poisoned food, repel all manner of black magic (the well-known ṣaṭkarmāṇi are listed), prevent capture by serpents, and counter destruction by the weapons of enemies. Through a seamless connection with such a divinity, the progress of ensorcelled boats, carts, and machines (yantra) is halted. Through a hundred thousand mantra repetitions, says the JY, one achieves the goal of this ritual, freedom from adversity. The goddess abiding or being reflected in various media is seen directly. She shows the past and the future that the sādhaka himself sees.

The loci of the prasenā are many. She appears in highly insubstantial and unstable form as a shadow or apparition. Her appearance does not come out of thin air, however, but on the surface of water, a metal pot, a sword-blade, in the flame of a lamp, in a mirror, the eye of a girl, the sun, the moon, his own thumb smeared with oil, or within his body in the point of light between his brows, and there reveals the answer he seeks. The answer may take the form of apparitional writing or a disembodied voice, or it may be uttered by a young boy or girl placed in a trance for this purpose (svasthāveśaḥ); or it may appear to such a medium in one of the aforesaid substrates; or it may arise in the sādhaka’s mind when he awakens after a night spent in a temple of the deity.70

The Buddhist practice of pratisenā, noted by Orofino, requires fairly extensive preparatory ritual, including the propitiation of spirits, the consecration of the ritual ground by covering it with a fresh layer of cow dung, the construction and disposition of yantras, the recitation of mantras, offerings to various divinities, and the employment of a youth to gaze at a specified reflective surface. This may be a mirror, a sword, a thumb, a lamp, the moon, the sun, water, and the eye, any of which can become a medium through which a pratisenā appears.71 Citing the Tibetan version of the Subāhuparipṛcchānāmatantra, (Questions of Subāhu), Orofino notes that the youth must be washed and dressed in clean white clothes, and possess certain physical characteristics, including “perfect limbs, no prominent veins, bones or muscle joints, a beautiful shape, clear and slanting eyes.” Furthermore:

He or she should sit on a rug of kusa grass facing eastward, incense should be burnt, and the secret mantras should be recollected. After having removed the dust from the mirror, one [the officiant] should recite the mantra, mentally concentrating on the boy (or the girl), seven, eight or ten times.… [Then] the young medium, facing westward, looking through the eye of the divinity, will see past, present, and future events.72

The South Asian texts, including the Tantras in question73 and the South Indian manuscripts, omit much of this detail. Some of it may be assumed, however, including the physical prerequisites for the youth, as these were common features of Indian ritual prescription. Orofino’s description gives the impression that this type of divination was not uncommon, that it was part of the known complex of shamanistic practice in Tibet.

We have seen from the mid- to late first-millennium Jaina texts that the ritual of svasthāvesa was multidenominational in South Asia, that this was shared across sect and lineage boundaries. A further example of this, though not explicitly labeled svasthāvesa, is found in Hemacandra’s Yogaśāstra (5.173–176). The context here is very specific, the determination of lifespan. In this passage, the deity is said to enter into an inanimate reflective medium, such as a mirror, after which a young girl picks up and passes on messages transmitted by the deity through the reflective surface. One might argue that this is not possession of the girl; rather, it is an allied divinatory practice. However, in South Asia, people, especially women, are considered possessed if they transmit such messages in trance states. There is every reason to believe that this was also the case in the first millennium. Hemacandra says:

Upon being queried, a deity [devatā], who has been made to descend into a mirror, a thumb, a wall, or a sword through a rite involving mantra repetition, announces her verdict regarding time [of death]. The mantra to be recited is oṃ naravīre svāhā, and is perfected after 10,008 repetitions of it during a solar or lunar eclipse. After that, whenever such a question is asked, the ritualist need repeat it only 1,008 times at that moment. The deity then becomes absorbed in the mirror, etc., following which a young girl [kanyā] announces the verdict. In this way, the deity, attracted by the virtues of a good sādhaka, herself speaks decisively on topics regarding the past, present, and future [trikālaviṣayam].74

This variety of media that might become possessed appears to be retained in the comparable Chinese texts, though the later Sanskrit manuscript material focuses on inducing āveśa only in young boys. It is interesting to consider that the earliest Sanskrit suggestion of this procedure is found in one of the foundational texts of Āyurveda, the Susruta-Saṃhitā, composed in approximately the second century C.E. This text includes the following verse: “As a reflection is to a mirror or other similar surface, as cold and heat are to living beings, as a sun’s ray is to one’s gemstone, and as the one sustaining the body is to the body, in the same way ‘seizers’ [grahāḥ] enter an embodied one but are not seen.”75 This raises an important question: Do we see in this statement a movement from metaphor to metaphysics as the idea proceeds from āyurvedic texts to tantric texts? Can we assume that what began as a trope ended up assuming a concretized cosmological and ritual locus? Or does Susruta take an older known divinatory practice and turn it into a trope? Based on the present state of evidence, it is impossible to answer these questions confidently.
