+++
title = "08 The Mantramahodadhi"

+++
The procedures for employing children for divinatory purposes in India were not limited to a shadowy presence in a few obscure, regionally specific texts. This is similar to the situation in China, where it was relatively widespread, as Davis’s extensive documentation shows. However, even if the practice was not as widespread in India as in China, corroborative evidence from other Tantras shows that it spread beyond the confines of a few local cults. At any rate, knowledge of it appears to have entered into more mainstream Tantra sastra.125 The Mantramahodadhi (MM), a popular and diffuse compendium of both dakṣiṇācāra and vāmācāra tantric practice composed in the sixteenth century by Mahīdhara,126 includes several verses on this practice or on an adaptation of it.

First, the sādhaka should properly worship the goddess (specific goddesses are not named here), thoroughly divinizing both himself and the maṇḍalas or yantras that he is using to replicate the goddess. This he should do by observing certain vows, divinizing his body through performance of nyāsa and enlivening the maṇḍala or yantra with other mantras, some of them complex and extremely long, totaling hundreds of syllables. He should then “mount a corpse either at a crossroad or a cremation ground [smasāna], abandon shame and fear, and keep his mind concentrated on the mantra (vidyā).127 Then, in the middle of the night, concentrated on his japa, he should hear these distant words: ‘Become transcendent and obtain complete perfection in all mantras’” (pārago bhava vidyānāṃ sarvāṃ siddhim avāpnuhi).128 The text continues: “He should seat two eight-year-old children born into learned families before him and place his hands on their heads. He should then perform japa of this mantra. Both of these children will then become capable of expounding on Vedānta and Nyāya. One who is curious about this ought to see for himself the wonders of this Vidyā.”129 Although the instructions for this ritual do not mention possession, we must assume that it is implicit, as important components of svasthāvesa or other related practices of oracular possession are evident here.

This description is replete with marks of brahmanical orthodoxy and represents a major transformation compared to the earlier material on child mediums. The evidence from the earlier Tantras as well as the brief and highly specified manuscripts from southern India suggests that the tantric practices on which this description was based are here adapted to “higher” goals of brahmanical orthodoxy. The prasenā is not mentioned, and apparently had a short life, at least for a deity (or even a spirit), and disappeared by the sixteenth century, her shadowy station having been usurped by a Mahāvidyā130 or by Bhairava or Hanumān, aspects of Śiva. Knowledge of the past, present, and future as the goal of this sādhana was replaced by the more brahmanical goal of gaining knowledge of Vedānta and Nyāya. Similarly, the strings of bija mantras employed to invoke the Goddess and so on seem to have disappeared.

Concerning the acquisition of knowledge of Vedānta and Nyāya, it is important to note that these verses occur in a brief subsection (5.83–90) prescribing three tantric rituals to be performed on children, of which this is the third. The first states that after cutting the umbilical cord, the sādhaka (the father?, a hired tāntrika?) should inscribe a mantra for Vācaspati, the Lord of Speech, on the tongue of the newborn child with a sharp blade of dūrva grass that had been dipped in gorocanā, an extrusion from the biliary tract of a cow (either a large gallstone or a bezoar), which is used for tantric and alchemical purposes in India.131 Upon reaching the age of eight, the child will then become proficient in all sastras (sarvaśāstrajñatā). The second ritual prescribes mantras and offerings (balidāna) that enable the child to become a great poet (kavitvakṛt). Neither of these mentions possession; but it is difficult in the tantric culture of these texts to imagine that gorocanā or balidāna by themselves confer extraordinary knowledge on a child. The purpose of these offerings, certainly, was to attract spirits or minor deities to enter the child, either permanently or temporarily, thus enabling the child to recite sastras or compose poetry.

As for the uncharacteristic absence of mantras, the text of the MM is replete with strings of such mantras; indeed, this fifth chapter (taraṇga) is particularly congested with them. Thus, it may have been assumed that the aspirant has practiced certain sādhanas and mastered the complex mantras before settling in the smasāna and reciting this mantra of intent. This is supported by the earlier tantric texts and the South Indian manuscripts, all of which prescribe strings of bija mantras for this purpose. It is likely that Mahīdhara was well aware of the tantric environment and background of this practice. To give him the benefit of the doubt, it may not be so much that for a popular handbook he decided to opt for the sanguine over the sanguinary (there is plenty of sex and violence in this Tantra), but that he was vigilant about not losing the sometimes tenuous connection between tantric and other, more public, brahmanical practice.
