+++
title = "+11 Tantra and the Diaspora of Childhood Possession"

+++
CHAPTER 10 DEALT WITH TANTRIC GENERATIVE PROcesses that were formally designed and executed and that gradually evolved into possession as the reconstruction was effected and the symbolism became pervasive. This chapter addresses a different mode of tantric possession, one that, as described in the previous chapter, is “positive,” but is much more dramatic, cutting through deeper cultural and sociological layers.1 The term we adopt for this hitherto unrecognized form of oracular possession, taken from a few Sanskrit texts discussed below, is svasthāvesa (literally “possession of one who is in a good state of [mental and physical] health).2

Two preliminary observations are in order. First, this term itself indicates “positive” possession, the opposite of opportunistic possession of one who is ill, which, as we see in Chapter 12, falls under the āyurvedic category of āgantuka (pathology induced from without by demonic grahas [seizers]). Svasthāvesa is, however, much more specific than the literal meaning of the term indicates. Second, the textual evidence presented here demonstrates that oracular possession akin to that which fills the pages of modern ethnographies, described in Chapters 2 and 4 above, may be historicized much more than scholars have recognized. That svasthāvesa has been barely mythologized and narrativized lends weight to this historicization and allows us to trace with a greater degree of confidence its origins and diffusion beyond the borders of India and South Asia.

Although the term svasthāvesa was, apparently, never widely used, it is attested in many Sanskrit texts beginning in the second half of the first millennium C.E.. We examine these occurrences shortly. It is prudent, however, first, to provide a summary description of this possession. In svasthāvesa, a medium causes a spirit or deity to descend into any one of several reflective objects or into the body of a young boy or girl, after which the medium or youth answers questions from a client regarding events of the past, present, or future. Most of the Sanskrit texts in which svasthāveśa is mentioned by name or described without using this term are unedited tantric compendia from northern and eastern India that may be dated from the ninth to twelfth centuries. A few texts that mention svasthāvesa or its distinctive components predate this material, while others describing this practice without identifying it by name are, with rare exception, much later manuscript fragments found in libraries in South India.

To the best of my knowledge, the name svasthāvesa is mentioned in only four published texts: the Harṣacarita, a prose hagiography of King Harṣa composed by Bāṇabhaṭṭa in the mid-seventh century; the Kathāsaritsāgara, composed by Somadeva in the eleventh century; a tantric compendium called Īśānaśivagurudevapaddhati (ĪŚP) by the eponymous Īśānaśivagurudevamiśra, composed in Kerala in the eleventh century; and the anonymous tantric digest titled Tantrarāja of the sixteenth century. Except the ISP, all of these were composed in North India. I discuss these texts below, but more important are the unpublished manuscripts in which this term appears. Of central concern is the transmission of this ritual, at least in its textual redactions, from its probable point of origin in North India, eastward across the Himalayas into China and southward into the Deccan and the presentday states of Andhra Pradesh and Tamilnadu.

I discuss the condition and extent of the Indic material, a revealing intermediate tantric text called Mantramahodadhi, the key ritual and ontological terms, the ritual participants, and the immediate historical roots of the practice. I cannot here enter into a discussion of the deeper historical roots of svasthāveśa, which, I suspect, are enmeshed in shamanistic practices that are unrecoverable today. I mention this simply to acknowledge a question that will arise for many readers, not because I am in a position to answer it. The available evidence simply does not permit this. However, I examine comparable and largely derivative Chinese texts, before finally turning my attention more fully to the South Indian manuscripts. It is also important to note the historical events that facilitated the transmission and dissemination of this unique tantric material. Because svasthāvesa involves as its most striking project the inducement of deity possession in children, I conclude this chapter by speculating on the reasons for this.
