+++
title = "01 Possession as Yoga Practice"

+++

Possession is mentioned in the third adhyāya of Patañjali’s Yogasūtms (YS), the chapter dealing with extraordinary powers (vibhūti, siddhi) gained through the practice of yoga. YS 3.38 reads: “Due to loosening the cause of bondage and from full knowledge of [the mechanics of psychic] movement, entrance [āveśa] of one’s mind [citta] into another’s body [becomes possible]” (bandhakāraṇaśaithilyāt pracārasaṃvedimāc ca cinasya paraśarīrāveśaḥ).3 The primary commentator on the YS, Vyāsa, believes that the cause (kāmṇa) of bondage in the form of the repository of one’s accumulated actions (karmāśaya) is loosened by the power of samādhi. It is the evaporation of the natural bondage of the siddha or accomplished yogin to objects of perception that allows the citta—thought or the power of mind—to flow into the body (and mind) of another person, regardless of the extent to which the other individual is caught in the grip of his or her or her own perceptual universe and karmic web.

Vijñānabhikṣu, a sixteenth-century vedāntin who wrote an important commentary on Vyāsa, adds that the movement (pracāra) of consciousness from one body to another is conducted along a certain nāḍi (subtle nerve).4 Nārāyaṇa Tīrtha, the author of a bhakti-oriented commentary on the YS titled Yogasiddhāntacandrikā,5 says that the citta enters and exits through the apānanāḍi, the nāḍi controlling the downward movement of breath. He adds that, after the thread connecting the citta of the yogin to his own body is severed, the experience of entering another body, whether dead or alive, becomes like that of entering another country. Analogies abound for this peculiar action: Vyāsa states that the movement of the mind is followed by that of the senses, like ordinary worker bees flying along after the “king bee.” In his Vivaraṇa on Vyśsa’s commentary, Śaṇkara states that the consciousness of one who is not a siddha is agitated by its fixedness to the karmic repository nearly to the point of immobility. Its limited mobility is like a bell that has been struck or the flickering of a heap of glowing coals.6

In spite of these explanations, the problem of determining the exact sense of the YS remains. What enters or possesses the psychophysical complex of the individual being possessed is the citta of the possessor. This citta is most often understood as “mind” or “thought.” Yet a difference exists between the two. The mind, as it is usually understood in the West, is the container of thought, inviting the possibility that a limited invasion consisting of part of the citta might occur in the form of introducing a single thought into the individual being psychically entered. Alternatively, the mind may be regarded as the container of thoughts, intentions, feelings, karmic residue, and so on, with, in the case of āveśa, a capacity for greater interaction and decision-making in the mind and body of the one being possessed. Although the citta in the YS usually indicates “thought” alone, here it appears to signify the mind together with the “inner organ” (antaḥkaraṇa) or heart.7 It is in this latter sense that Vyāsa and Vijñānabhikṣu appear to interpret citta, at least in this sūtra. Nevertheless, the distinction is important, because the extent of possession and the manner in which it is effected are two of the important features in determining yogically induced āveśa. We have already seen that possession can be instigated either by the possessed or the possessor, and here it appears that the possession occurs as a result of the motivation or intention of an outside agent, the yogin (or yoginī), who would bring with him (or her) an entire mental apparatus containing thoughts, ideas, impressions, and so on. Still, the YS leaves open the possibility of a limited or partial possession, such as entering and influencing another’s dream state by introducing a single thought or image, or wholesale takeover of the other’s thoughts, intentions, and mental powers, such as occurred when Śaṇkara transferred his citta into the body of the dead King Amaruka, an episode we examine in detail below. Thus, in this sūtra, citta probably indicates an entire mentating apparatus, though Patañjali’s certain knowledge of exemplars—such as Vipula Bhārgava’s entering the mind and body of Ruci, who retained at least partial awareness of her situation—suggests that citta here can also indicate a single thought or a localized body of thoughts. Regardless of the commentators’ formal analysis, the very presence of this sūtra in the YS suggests the accuracy of Eliade’s observation, noted earlier, of eclecticism in the practice of textually sanctioned (and sanctified) yoga: Possession states, recognized from either experience or legend, were admitted (with certain conditions) into the yoga śāstra.

This sūtra does not exist entirely in isolation in the YS. Several other sūtras in the third chapter or pāda of the YS illustrate that the yogin (or yoginī) trains his (or her) mind or consciousness to temporarily leave the physical body in order to experience extrasensory phenomena. The process described in the YS for realizing any siddhi (and we must assume this for YS 3.38 on possession, even though the key vocabulary is missing) is to bring together and deploy as a single unit the three highest limbs of the eightfold path (aṣṭāṅga) of yoga, namely, dhāraṇa (concentration), dhyāna (meditation), and samādhi, (ecstasy). This process is called saṃyama (bringing together), and the YS uses it in the ablative (saṃyamāt) in a number of sūtras in the third pāda, indicating that it is a practice. For example, YS 3.21 states, “By practicing saṃyama on the [outer] form of the body, when its power to be known is stopped [and] there being no contact with the light of the eye, there is disappearance [of the yogin’s body].”8 YS 3.24 states, “By practicing saṃyama on different kinds of strength, the yogin acquires the strength of an elephant, etc.”9 The next sūtra, YS 3.25, states, “By casting the light of [higher] sense-activity toward them, there is [intuitive] knowledge regarding the subtle, the veiled, and far away objects.”10 The next sūtra, YS 3.26, states, “By practicing saṃyama on the sun, [the yogin] gains the knowledge of the worlds [bhuvana].”11 Other sūtras say that practicing saṃyama on the moon gives rise to knowledge of the arrangement of the stars (3.27), if the practice is directed to the navel cakra, the yogin obtains knowledge of the arrangement of the body (3.29), and so on. All of this indicates that the yogin or yoginī was able, theoretically at least, to use their more exalted yogic skills to move their minds or consciousness beyond the confines of the body, as well as to transform the very nature of their bodies. From this platform, entering the bodies of others was a very short (and natural) step.

Āveśa’s sense of pervasion in the YS is intriguingly close to notions of pervasion expressed by Patañjali’s use of the words samādhi and samāpatti. YS 3.3 defines samādhi as a state in which one’s self-nature becomes as if void as the mind becomes completely immersed in an object of meditation.12 Samāpatti, usually translated as “absorption,” is nearly identical to samādhi. Indeed, arriving at an agreeable distinction between them has always been problematic. YS 1.41 appears to describe samāpatti as a state outside meditative practice, an experience of absorption in the world in which the mind acquires clear perception of a cognition, the object cognized, and the cognizer.13 Āveśa shares this quality of absorption or immersion, but is defined neither as a state of meditative one-pointedness nor as a state of active experience resulting from meditation. Because it is not a frequently attested technical term in yoga philosophy, āveśa remains undefined in the YS. Its meaning is assumed from other contexts as an experience of absorption in an object, entity, notion, or psychic state that lies beyond the meditative process per se.

The great Jain scholar Hemacandra (1088–1172) addressed the topic of possession at surprising length in his Yogaśāstra, at the end of his obligatory chapter on breath control (prāṇāyāma). After describing a practice in which the aspirant gains the ability to move the breath (vāyu) at will from the respiratory system through the aperture at the crown of the head (brahmarandhra), then guiding it to settle on specified objects, such as fragrant plants, camphor, small birds, then large animate and inanimate objects (5.264–73), Hemacandra states that one should enter (praviśet) “bodies from which the breath has gone” by utilizing the vāyu from the left nostril (evaṃ parāsudeheṣu praviśed vāmanāsayā). The primary subtle channel or nāḍi on the left side of the body, terminating at the left nostril, associated with the moon and tantric practice, is called iḍā.14 In the next line of this penultimate verse of the chapter on yogic use of breath Hemacandra issues a warning: “Entry into the body of a living being [jīvaddehapraveśaḥ] is not addressed because of fear of transgression.”

This, however, does not prevent him from offering a deeper analysis of the process in his autocommentary called Svopajñavivaraṇa (or Svopajñavṛtti):

After exiting through the aperture at the crown of the head, one should enter [praviśya] [another body] through the other’s downward moving breath [apānavartmanā]. Then one should spread oneself from the lotus at the navel [ānābhyambujam] to the lotus at the heart via the suṣumṇā or central subtle channel. At that point, one should obstruct the movement of the other’s prāṇa with one’s own breath [vāyu]. From that body, he should continue in this fashion until that embodied being falls flat, his movement faded away. When that other body has been completely liberated [of its previous occupant], the yogin whose actions and senses have come alive in all the activities [of the other] should commence movement as if in his own body. The intelligent [yogin] may play about fully in that other body for half a day or even for a day. Again, through that same process one should enter one’s own body [puram].

Hemacandra concludes this interesting account of entering another’s body, one of the most detailed I have found in Sanskrit literature, by stating that mastery of this skill enables the intelligent yogin to move about willfully, without attachment, as if liberated.15
