+++
title = "02 Possession and the Subtle Body in the Yogavāsiṣṭha"

+++
The Yogavāsiṣṭha contains a passage (6.1.82) that is as detailed as Hemacandra’s on the process of possessing other bodies. This important ninth-century text in which yoga, Vedānta, and surreal transformation are central recounts stories told to Rāma as a child by Vasiṣṭha, his family’s guru. The passage in question is included in a lengthy tale of King Śikhidhvaja of Mālva and his devoted wife, Cūḍālā, who were supremely pious and dedicated to the pursuit of self-knowledge (ātmajñāna). It was Cūḍālā who attained enlightenment first, described here as expanded consciousness (citpracetanī, 6.1.78.29). Selflessly, she wished the same for her husband. But his patronizing attitude toward her achievements spurred her to seek solitude in the acquisition of siddhis. She transformed herself into a male sage, a more convincing authority figure to her husband, then into an amorous woman, until finally she reverted to herself. This series of transformations leads the narrator, Vasiṣṭha, into a lengthy digression on the nature of prāṇa (vital air) and the manipulation of kuṇḍalinī, the serpentine energy in the spine that, when controlled, leads to ecstatic experience and enlightenment. In the course of this discussion, Vasiṣṭha eventually turned to the means by which yogins were able to make their bodies either tiny, the size of atoms (aṇutām), or extremely large (sthūlatām, 6.1.82.1).

Vasiṣṭha describes three methods for achieving this. The first involves a complex meditation in the form of a visualization on kuṇḍalinī, the second emphasizes knowing the distinction between the body and the self, while the third involves manipulation of the breath, kuṇḍalinī, and freeing the jīva or living being to enter other bodies. The entire passage is best translated in full, because all three methods discussed require entrance into other forms of matter, even if only the third is directly addressed as possession.



Śrī Vasiṣṭha said:

Listen to this correct description of the body of yogins becoming reduced to the size of an atom or greatly expanded. A spark [kaṇa] of fire, like a golden butterfly, a fragment of lightning flashing in an evening cloud, ignites above the sheath that holds the lotus cakra in the heart. It quickly expands due to the force of consciousness [saṃvitti], as if it were blown by a gust of wind. Now impelled by its form as consciousness [saṃvid], it moves like the rising sun. It has arrived in a moment, expanded, shining like the first ray of the rising sun on morning clouds; it makes the entire body melt, along with its limbs, as fire does to gold. This fire, which cannot bear the touch of water, desiccates the outer body down to the big toe. What remains is the subtle body in the form of the mind. Then, after shaking off this double body, it dissolves wherever it is as a result of the agitation of prāṇa. In this way it is like mist dissolving in the wind. Like a line of smoke rising from fire, the kuṇḍalinī energy [śakti], freed through the channel [nāḍi] rising from the energy center at the perineum [mūlādhāra], merges into the cosmic void [vyoman]. This citizen [nāgarī, viz. the kuṇḍalinī], like a puff of smoke, is a spectacle vibrating internally, enveloped by the ego sense [ahaṃkāra], which comprises the living being [jīva] constituted of the embrace of mind [manas] and intellect [buddhi]. She is capable of moving about at will, entering into [nir yāti] a lotus stalk, a mountain, grass, a wall, a rock, the sky, or the surface of the earth. She [kuṇḍalinī] alone becomes consciousness, establishing itself step by step, filled from beginning to end with its fluid essence [rasa]. Immersed in this essence, it becomes like a leather bag immersed in water. O Rāma, filled with such essence, this quickly assumes any desired shape; she places in the mind of an artist lines of a certain shape. Due to the influence of this resolute intention [dṛḍhabhāva] she develops an internal skeleton. Like a fetus growing inside a mother, this extremely subtle energy [śakti] becomes established in its own germinated sprout. O Rāghava, know this truth which has been formulated by the learned, that the energy of a living being [jīvaśakti] can constitute itself into anything, from Mt. Meru to a patch of grass. You have thus heard about the practice [sādhana] of reducing your size to that of an atom, etc., through the practice of yoga. Now hear my auspicious words on how this can be gained through knowledge [jñānasādhya].

Consciousness itself [cinmātram] as known here is one, pure, quiescent, devoid of any defining characteristic, subtler than the subtle, peaceful, and is neither the world nor actions within the world. As consciousness constructs the self with the self, a self in which will becomes expectant, the result is a living being [jīva] whose consciousness then becomes turgid [āvilatām] [with desire]. A jīva that is deluded as a result of confusion of will sees only the unreal, which is embedded in the physical, just as a boy sees a yakṣa in an [unmarked] object that is held up. When illumination truly arises as a result of [holding up] the lamp of knowledge, then the jīva’s delusion of will [saṅkalpamohaḥ] dissipates, like clouds in autumn. The sense of willfulness disappears as the body becomes quiescent, O Rāghava, just like the extinguished lamp when its oil runs out. Just as a being after waking from sleep no longer sees a dream, similarly, when this truth arises, the jīva will no longer see this body. When what is unreal is justified through an attitude that it is real, the jīva becomes firmly entrenched in the sense of the reality of the body. But due to the meditative experience [bhāvanā] of the singularity of reality, the disembodied (jīva) becomes gloriously happy. Indeed, superimposition of the reality of the self [ātmabhāvanam] on the body, etc., on that which is not the self, is as difficult to remove as is the intention to force sunbeams to remove the harshness of inertia. But when the experience of the self [ātmabhāva] is with the self alone, then consciousness itself [cinmātram] is revealed as all pervasive, stainless, and pure; through the sun of knowledge the sense of “I am” is destroyed. Others who have known the self meditate [ bhāvayanti] on it in such a way that they quickly see this reality through the intensity of this meditation [dṛdhabhāvanayā]. Nevertheless, O Rāghava, some foolish people, through the use of this kind of intense meditation, will convert poison into ambrosia and ambrosia into poison. In this way, it is often seen that whatever is meditated upon with intensity is quickly brought to bear. When the body is seen as a body, it is that alone which becomes real; but when it is seen with an attitude [bhāva] that it is unreal, then the body becomes a part of the atmosphere. O Rāma, you have heard about how to obtain abilities such as reducing the body to the size of an atom through utilizing knowledge. Now you, a good person, should hear about another method.

The jīva is lifted from the sheath [gṛham; lit. “house”] of the kuṇḍalinī through the yogic practice of breath retention after an exhalation [recaka]. It is then joined [within another body], as the fragrance of a flower carried by the wind. The body (of the yogin), its vibrations stopped [virataspandaḥ], becomes like wood or stone. He then submerges his jīva in the body, jīva, and mind of the other person, carefully, like sprinkling water on plants. The prepared jīva enters inside anything fixed or mobile, in order to enjoy that state according to his own desire. In this way the yogin enjoys the glory of siddhis. If it is still existent, the yogin then may reenter his own body, or he can enjoy that of another; either way, the body becomes resplendent. In this way, through an act of pervasion, a yogin, through any of these bodies, can fill all other reflected forms [bimbān], or he can establish himself completely by filling up the entire universe with consciousness [saṃvit]. The yogin then becomes the light of consciousness, master of himself, having known that which has eternally risen and is completely free of fault. O Rāma, he can obtain whatever he desires. They know this to be the real state of unobstructed bliss. (6.1.82.1–34)16

The first practice has the earmarks of a visualization practice. The power of consciousness itself activates the energy of kuṇḍalinī to assume or construct any shape desired by the yogin. All supernatural accomplishments or siddhis, including possession of another body, naturally results from this matrix of realization and practice. The second is the realization of siddhis through clarity of understanding of the nature of the relationship between body, consciousness, and intention. If the body is understood and experienced as unreal, the consciousness is liberated to achieve siddhi. The third practice is more specifically yogic in that it does not require the recognition of the body as unreal, but emphasizes the same elements of breath control and suffusion of the being itself, the jīva, in the body of another being, as mentioned by Hemacandra and the commentators on the YS.

Searching the literature for narrative examples of these practices does not yield much fruit, barring what we have already seen in the MBh. This is no doubt due in great measure to the normative thrust of Sanskrit literature about which we commented in Chapter 1. Most examples will be of divine or semidivine beings; they are rarely, as in the example from the Mahābhārata (MBh) of Vipula Bhārgava and Ruci, the wife of Devaśarman, of yogins. An example of possession among divine beings, which is nevertheless appropriate to this yogic context in which knowledge is gained through āveśa, is recounted in the Liṅga Purāṇa 1.17–20.17 In this story, sparked by a divine competitive instinct, the great deities Brahmā and Viṣṇu enter each other (pravistah, 1.20.20), taking turns, for several thousand years each time, viewing the universe from the other’s perspective. In the end, they honor each other, perceive each other’s greatness, and, after realizing the superiority of Śiva to both of them, decide to abandon their contest. In these two examples, āveśa qualifies as a vṛtti or fluctuation within the mind, in the first case because of the involuntary manner in which Purañjana entered into his state of darkness and in the second case because of the intentionality of the deities’ entrance into each other’s mental fields. Yet both are explicitly described as states of absorption. In its practical application, then, as these paradigmatic examples reveal, āveśa is an absorptive state in which a specific vṛtti is isolated, which distinguishes it from samādhi, a state of yogically induced absorption devoid of such vṛttis.18 It is stories like these, perhaps in addition to credible demonstrations by yoga practitioners, which unfortunately remain undocumented, that must have precipitated the inclusion of a sūtra on possession in the YS and in Hemacandra’s Yogaśāstra, though, of course, the narrative statements of practices in the later Yogavāsiṣṭha must stand apart as a summation of the late first-millennium convergence of Vedānta and yoga.
