+++
title = "03 Śaṇkara’s Possession of a Dead King"

+++
It is important now to return to the story of Śaṇkara and the deceased king. This is told in varying degrees of detail in the hagiographies of Śaṇkara life. Two may be cited here: the Śaṇkaradigvijaya (ŚDV) of Mādhava-Vidyāraṇya and the Śrīśaṅkaravijaya (ŚV) of Anantānandagiri.19 The former is much more expansive on the events of his personal life, which is densely imbued with the miraculous, while the latter is both more concise and diffuse, focusing more closely on Śaṇkara’s travels and debates. Both recount the tale of the great ācārya’s possession, which has become a standard narrative item in vedāntic circles. Both of these hagiographies were written several centuries after Śaṇkara’s life, which was probably in the early decades of the eighth century.20 Both abound with dialogue and brief frame stories and are often punctuated by commentary and analysis. From both accounts, it appears that Śaṇkara was in constant motion, traveling from place to place to debate—and defeat—exponents of countless other viewpoints (mata, darśana), from Buddhists to Jainas to Hindu sectarian leaders whose movements centered on the worship of particular deities, including Gaṇapati, Indra, and Yama, as well as exponents of astrology and worshippers of bhūtas, vetālas, and semidivine beings. Śaṇkara’s rebuttal to these teachers was usually a variation on the same theme: Their systems were invalid because they were not based on the authority of the Vedas. One of these systems was kāmaśāstra,21 systematic knowledge of human sexuality.

After finishing off Maṇḍana Miśra, the noted exponent of vedic orthodoxy,22 in debate (according to the hagiographies Śaṅkara later initiated him into saṃnyāsa), Śaṅkara was challenged by Maṇḍana’s learned wife, Ubhayabhāratī, as she is known in the ŚDV, or Sarasavāṇī, as she’s called in the ŚV. Her challenge was to prove his mastery of all branches of knowledge by demonstrating his erudition in kāmaśāstra. Śaṇkara could not refuse the challenge, but it put him in a predicament; he needed to avoid both defeat and embarrassment. He was forced to consider how to gain control of this branch of knowledge without compromising his hard-won celibacy (brahmacarya). He knew that mere textual study would not be enough; kāmaśāstra required practical as well as theoretical knowledge. In the end, Śaṇkara settled on a strategy of possession.

After learning, then double-checking, that a certain local king named Amaruka had died, he went to the edge of town and left his body, devoid of consciousness (citigataḥ), in the hollow of a boulder inside a cave. He saw to it that his inert body was guarded by his disciples and then used his yogic power to enter the body of the dead king through the brahmarandhra, the aperture in the crown of the head, with his subtle body (ŚV: liṅgaśarīra; ŚDV: ātivāhikaśarīra) and ego (ŚV: abhimānā).23 The ŚV provides a name for this special knowledge: parakāyapraveśavidyā (the art of possessing another’s body). Because the king rose from the dead, the texts continue, the kingdom was relieved and joyous, and sponsored tumultuous receptions and grand rituals, including anointing the king with a profusion of milk.

After the celebrations, the king proceeded to the bedchamber of the chief queen and experienced great pleasure, because he was, it is said, skilled in lovemaking (ŚV: ratikauśalāt)—an innate skill, it must be supposed, given Śaṅkara’s presumption of lifelong celibacy (though note the YS passage quoted above that states that one can possess another being “in order to enjoy according to its own desire whatever is desired by that being”).24 Nevertheless, he joined with his wife, her face with his, her chest with his, her navel with his, each of her parts joined with those of his, fondling her secret places (ŚV: kakṣāsthāneṣu) with his hands, with the confidence of a married man.25 A quick learner indeed! The queen was completely fooled. She knew the sexual arts, her husband’s love prattle, and only her husband’s body; she had no idea that he was no longer alive. In this way, Śaṇkara swiftly spread his power in all directions, wherever there were lifeless bodies (yatra kutra śarīrāṇi jīvahīnāni bhumiṣu)—presumably meaning that he practiced this art later as well, in other, temporarily appropriated bodies. After some time, both the ministers of the kingdom and Śaṇkara’s disciples became anxious, the ministers because the king was doing a much better job than before he “died,” and the disciples because Śaṇkara did not return within the one month he specified to them would be the maximum time he would be away from his body. The ministers guessed, correctly, that the dead king had been possessed and promulgated an edict that all lifeless bodies must be cremated immediately, both to avoid further incidents of possession and to discover the identity of the possessing agent, whose body would be reposing lifeless in a secret place.

Śaṇkara’s disciples, worried that their guru had been overcome by the delights of the good life and had fallen from the path, arranged to travel incognito to the court as musicians and play for him, thus coaxing his memory of the true dharma. In fact, they were correct; he was enjoying his life of wealth, power, and sex. Nevertheless, Śaṇkara had the good sense to grant these “musicians” an audience, and, after hearing them warble a tune that was little more than a poetic rendering of basic upaniṣadic theology replete with phrases like neti neti and tat tvam asi, he came to his senses. He realized he had had his fill of hands-on kāmaśāstra and immediately left the king’s body, “like a bird leaving a nest” (ŚV), before the guests assembled at the performance. He returned to his own body just in time—it had been discovered by the king’s minions, who had laid it on a pyre in accordance with the directive to burn all lifeless bodies. In fact, although the pyre had been lit, the flames had not yet reached the body when Śaṇkara arrived. Śaṇkara thus had enough time to bring it to life through the same process he had used to take possession of the king’s body. He then recited a special hymn intended to extinguish the fire. This became known to Ubhayabhāratī, though it is not stated exactly how or why she elected to believe it. Nevertheless, it was sufficient proof to her that Śaṇkara had mastered kāmaśāstra. Thus, the great ācārya’s quest for omniscience was complete.

But, as noted, he did not pay for it with the energy or purity of his own physical body. He employed procedures known within yoga traditions, which, as we have seen, were also known to Vipula Bhārgava, as well as to Hemacandra, which is to say to yoga traditions both within and beyond Hindu orthodoxy. It must also be noted that the language employed here for sexual merging in the ŚV is almost identical to that used in the MBh to describe Vipula’s tenaciously nonsexual possession of Ruci, suggesting that possession may share some of the physical attractions or ecstasies of sex, at least in certain cases. Finally, it is important to note that this kind of possession was apparently reserved for the learned, for the yogin who has undergone the proper training. Although such stories abound—another one is recounted in the next chapter—this kind of yogic possession cannot be considered part of a tradition of possession; rather, as stated, it is part of a tradition of yoga and a tradition of textuality. If it was ever more than a hagiographical instantiation of yogic lore, it was doubtless employed sparingly and apparently had little ritual apparatus, except as yoga practice itself qualifies as ritual; nor was it embraced in any popular or festival context. Thus, it is perhaps little more than a textual and narrative oddity, albeit one with a background of intertextuality and a foundation in the popular spiritual imagination.
