+++
title = "04 Possession and the Body in the Brahmasūtras"

+++
The final section of Bādarāyaṇa’s Brahmasūtras (BS) discusses the symptoms of enlightenment. One of the final sūtras in this section states that, just as the flame of a lamp “enters” (āveśaḥ) another wick, a liberated being can enter another body (pradīpavad āveśas tathā hi darśayati, BS 4.4.15). It will be of interest to examine the remarks of a few commentators on this sūtra. We first look at what is probably the oldest surviving commentary on the BS, that of Bhāskara, composed in the mid-seventh century, whose sectarian affiliation is unclear from this commentary. This is his sole surviving work. Then we examine the remarks of Śaṇkara, who wrote his advaita commentary about a century later. The next commentary to be briefly examined is that of Nimbārka, whose school is called bhedābheda (nondifference in difference) and whose date is disputed, but may have flourished in South India at about the same time as Śaṇkara.26 Then, we look at the Vaiṣṇava commentary by Rāmānuja, who penned his viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified nondualism) works in the eleventh or twelfth century. This is followed by a brief exploration of the Śaiva commentary by Śrīkaṇṭha of the thirteenth century and the subcommentaries by Appayya Dīkṣita on both Śaṇkara and Śrīkaṇṭha, written in the seventeenth century. Finally, we examine the śuddhādvaita (pure nondualism) commentary by the Vaiṣṇava sectarian founder Vallabhācārya written in the early decades of the sixteenth century. To all of them, the sūtra assumes a background in yoga: āveśa is clearly regarded by both the sūtrakāra and the bhāṣyakāras as a siddhi (perfection) attainable through yogic practice or as a consequence of liberation. Examining this material also sheds light on the relationship between the different sectarian and commentatorial traditions with little studied aspects of their yogic heritage.

Bhaskara’s commentary on this sūtra is perhaps the most incisive of all; indeed, one wishes his successors had followed his thought more conspicuously. He begins by stating that a liberated person may assume many constructed bodies (nirmāṇaśarīrāṇi bahāni) at will. He then wonders whether these bodies possess their own independent consciousness and mind. He answers in the negative, that these belong to the individual inhabiting the body enacting the āveśa. If we do not assume this, states his philosophical opponent (pūrvapakṣin), we fall into the trap that ensnared the followers of the Vaiśeṣika (vaiśeṣikamate): that these projected emanations of the mind of the liberated person, which seem to constitute the substance of āveśa, will no longer be under his or her power, that the creator of these constructed bodies may lose control of his or her creations.27 Bhāskara denies this possibility, suggesting that if this were the case we would encounter many more liberated people than we do. Conversely, experience is impossible for a body without consciousness or mind. Thus, the omnipotence (sarvaśaktitva) that defines this kind of āveśa occurs when the emanations of the consciousness and mind of a liberated person influence another still hopelessly embedded in saṃsāra. He adds, however, that this does not negate the possibility that the liberated person could create additional bodies and inhabit them with his consciousness and mind.

Śaṇkara, in his Brahmasūtrabhāṣya, begins his comments by citing the śruti passage, Chāndogya Upaniṣad (ChU) 7.16.2: “He is unitary, (yet) he becomes threefold, fivefold, sevenfold, ninefold.”28 This passage, Śaṇkara and several others contend, may be cited in support of the present sūtra, demonstrating the possibility of a single ātman proliferating within many bodies. Śaṇkara’s rebuttal of his pūrvapakṣin is that mind and ātman can be separated. Through an act of positive intentionality (satyasaṃkalpatvāt), a person can, through yogic means, create another body with a mind of its own in which the emanator then joins (yokṣyate) his own ātman. This, Śaṇkara says, is consistent with yogaśāstra, and, as the earlier discussion makes clear, he appears correct in this assessment.29 The ensuing discussion in the BS (4.4.16–18) addresses the nature of the special knowledge available to a liberated person. The implication of the sūtras, recognized by all the commentators, is that this knowledge is gained through siddhis, a category into which āveśa falls, but which stops short of the ability to create, maintain, and dissolve universes, tasks strictly reserved for the gods.30 The subcommentaries on Śaṇkara, including Vācaspatimiśra’s Bhāmatī and Appayya Dīkṣita’s Kalpataruparimala, explain that the all-pervasiveness (vyāptitva) of the knowledge of a liberated person allows that knowledge to spread in any direction, in any place, into the sense organs (indriya) and the internal psychic organ (antaḥkaraṇa) of embodied beings.

Although Nimbārka’s commentary on this sūtra is brief, the subcommentary Vedāntakaustubhaḥ by Śrīnīvāsācārya and a further commentary on Śrīnīvāsācārya’s, called Vedāntakaustubhaprabhā, by Keśavakāśmīrabhaṭṭa, fill in some of the gaps. Nimbārka states simply that, like the light of a flame, āveśa of an individual (jīva) into many bodies is possible through the acquisition of special knowledge of the natural order (jñānena dharmabhūtena) and cites Śvetāśvatāra Upaniṣad 5.9 as his vedic authority (śruti). The Upaniṣad verse reads: “When the tip of a hair is split into a hundred parts, and one of those parts further into a hundred parts—the individual soul [jīva], on the one hand, is the size of one such part, and, on the other, it partakes of infinity.”31 Although the interpretation Nimbārka intends to impose on this text is clear—that the imperceptible and infinitely small jīva has the capacity to become all-pervasive and claim other bodies as part of its omnipresent domain—the commentators refine this interpretation and give it additional dimensions. Śrīnīvāsācārya notes that this is possible only for one who is liberated (mukta), while Keśavakāśmīrabhaṭṭa adds that the special knowledge referred to recognizes the distinction between the bound jīva and the liberated one. The enjoyment of the bound jīva is controlled by the dictates of karma, and this prevents such a jīva from expanding or moving beyond the boundaries of a single body. By contrast, the liberated jīva, free from the constraints of karma, has his or her own will supported by the will of the Supreme Lord (paramātman). Implicitly, then, if the liberated individual desires to possess another body, that desire is quite naturally manifested.

The twelfth-century philosopher of viśiṣṭādvaita (qualified nondualism), Rāmānuja, presents a lengthy discourse on the relationship between the body and the Lord in his commentary on BS 1.1.3. This sūtra reads śāstra-yonitvāt, expressing the idea that the only means of knowing brahman is śāstra, the testimony of sacred text. The relevant part of Rāmānuja’s argument begins with the proposition of the pūrvapakṣin that “bodies, the world, etc., are effects” (tanubhuvanādikāryam), indicating a material cause (upādānakāraṇam) that must be manipulated by a more remote, intelligent causal agent (nimittakāraṇam) capable of comprehending the complexity of the effect (kārya, vastu). For example, a potter has the skill and knowledge to produce clay pots. Or, continues the pūrvapakṣin, if the created item in question bears a greater degree of complexity, such as a palace, we must infer that it was produced by an individual with appropriately diverse knowledge and skills. Similarly, if human bodies and worlds are the visible effects in question, we must infer that the producer is a special being (puruṣaviśeṣāḥ) with much greater insight, namely, Īśvara, the generic term for an omniscient god. From the limited power of our own observation, we know that humans do not have this ability. So, we must infer that only a special being with majesty (aiśvarya), and so forth, could possess the knowledge and skill to produce the visible world. Thus, asserts the pūrvapakṣin, through inference (anumāna) we can know of this special being, this Īśvara; we do not need to resort to śāstra alone for this knowledge.

The pūrvapakṣin entertains some doubt regarding his own assertion, that potters produce pots using tools like sticks and wheels that are guided by their bodies. But, because Īśvara is bodiless, states this secondary objector, he cannot direct the processes of physical causation. The preferred doctrine (siddhānta), counters the primary pūrvapakṣin, is that bodies are not always necessary to bring about observable effects. For example, he states, it is our experience that a spirit (bhūta), a vampire (vetāla), snake poison (garala), and other substances can be destroyed or driven away by intention alone. Thus, Īśvara, though bodiless, is capable of impelling and guiding other objects; intentionality, he says unambiguously, is not dependent on a body (na śarīrāpekṣāḥ sankalpah). He continues that mind alone is responsible for intention (mana eva hi saṅkalpahetuḥ), and both mind and intentionality are well within the province of Īśvara. The pūrvapakṣin fields another secondary objection, namely, that if intentionality, which guides causation, is dependent on mind, then only embodied beings have the ability to create, to engender causation, because mind is possible only with embodiment. He replies that mind (manas) is eternal (nitya) and, by its very nature, can be in many places and thus may be separated from the body. In the end, the pūrvapakṣin argues, there are no limits to inference.32

This argument is countered by Rāmānuja’s own position (siddhānta), which asserts that under no circumstance can we infer a creator deity, embodied, bodiless from the outset, or disembodied. The logical reasons for this are legion, and Rāmānuja admirably brings all of these into his argument. It is not necessary for our purposes to discuss these reasons in detail, except to say that, after marshalling the arguments for his final views, Rāmānuja is left with no recourse but to appeal to the authority of śāstra, which informs us of this altogether transcendent Īśvara that is beyond the possibilities of limitation implicit in beings known through other means of apprehension (pramāṇa), including inference. Among these passages from śāstra are those given in Chapter 5, which state that brahman entered the inert universe, then embodied and enlivened beings that he himself created. Thus, Īśvara is qualitatively different even from liberated (mukta) beings, who, says Rāmānuja on BS 4.4.15, can extend their influence far and wide and create or possess as many bodies as they like. The liberated individual may invoke intention and thus manipulate the bodies for specified purposes that he or she creates and possesses. This kind of micromanagement through possession, however, is outside the interests of Īśvara, whose possession, ab origine, can be known only through sastra.

Appayya Dīkṣita (1554–1626) wrote a second, insufficiently studied, commentary on the BS called Śivārkamaṇidīpikā, in which he has more to say on the subject. This text, like his Kalpataruparimala, is actually a sub-commentary, though one with a much more pronounced sectarian bias than the Kalpataruparimala. The Śivārkamaṇidīpikā comments rather freely on the Brahmasūtrabhāṣyam of the lesser-known Śrīkaṇṭha (possibly of the thirteenth century), who also provides a distinctly Śaiva interpretation to the sūtras. Śrīkaṇṭha points out that a liberated person has the ability to fully possess an infinite number of bodies according to his will (svecchayānantaśarīraparigrahaṇasāmarthya). Like the other commentators on this sūtra, Śrīkaṇṭha states that a liberated person may be all-pervasive, that consciousness is not inherently limited to a single body, a view he attributes to the pūrvapakṣin. Like Śaṅkara, Śrīkaṇṭha and Appayya Dīkṣita cite ChU 7.16.2 as a sruti that proves that occupation of a body is not necessarily serial, but can occur simultaneously in more than one body. Śrīkaṇṭha states that, at least according to the present sutra, āvesa indicates a pervasion in the same sense that the light from a lamp pervades a house with its brightness.33 He then enters into a lengthy discussion of the meaning of deva in the word “Mahādeva,” the primary name of Śiva. This, he states, drawing on the proper etymology of the word, indicates the heavens, and, like Mahādeva, the liberated being is fully capable of exercising pervasiveness, wandering the heavens.

Vallabhācārya’s Aṇubhāṣya on this sūtra (the final section penned posthumously by his son Viṭṭhalanāthajī) represents a very different—and decidedly devotional—vision of the BS. He cites a passage from the Taittirīya Āraṇyaka as the authority for this sūtra: “[Just as] the husband, being the provider, supports [the family], the one god [eko devaḥ] entered into [ni√viś] the many.”34 Vallabhācārya interprets this sūtra to mean that the Lord himself (Kṛṣṇa) enters into the devotee, thus allowing the latter to enjoy the pleasures of the Lord’s līlās, just as the light from the newly ignited lamp functions like that of the old lamp and flame. One cannot enjoy this state through natural knowledge and actions, but only when Bhagavān possesses the individual.35 Regardless of who is “right” in the interpretation of this sūtra, the point for our purposes is that āvesa as used here is close to the usage in YS 3.38 and indicates benevolent possession.

Most scholars regard the BS as a product of the few centuries surrounding the turn of the Common Era, predating the YS, whose heavy Buddhist influence places it in all probability a few centuries later. But it is not certain whether in this instance the BS directly influenced the YS or whether āveśa was simply one among the many well-known esoteric arts which sūtra- and bhāṣyakāras felt obliged to recognize and incorporate into their works. In any case, āvesa remained part of the textuality of Vedānta throughout its history, as evidenced in the sixteenth-century Vedantasara, a primer intended for beginning students of the Vedānta sastra. This text speaks of the entry (praviṣṭatva) of caitanya (intelligence or consciousness),36 otherwise called visva, into the gross body without losing its orientation in the subtle body.37 We cannot neglect to mention that āveśa as it appears in this sūtra fits more closely the general semantic shape of (anu)praveśa than the usual sense of āvesa, a fact that the commentators implicitly understood. The possession considered here is instigated externally and is characterized by a kind of substantiality, a mass or density that confers a physicality that is often lacking in āveśa, but present in praveśa. Mind (manas) and consciousness (cetana, caitanya), here the property of the possessor, a presumed yogin (whether liberated or not), are assigned both mass and mobility. This is consistent with data from elsewhere in Indic textuality as well as the anthropological record: These are regarded as substances, whether their weight is coded, symbolic, or physical.
