+++
title = "05 Possession in Indian and Tibetan Buddhism"

+++
In spite of an official absence of an inherently existent self in Buddhism, personhood nonetheless persists, as discussed earlier. As Gombrich has remarked, “the anatta doctrine has no more affective immediacy with regard to the next life than with regard to this.”38 In practice, the person in Sinhala Buddhism, the topic of Gombrich’s appraisal, is as porous as any other in South Asia, as the work of Gombrich, Kapferer, and others testifies.39 To further demonstrate the extent of this porousness, it is instructive to examine briefly some of the lexical evidence of possession in Indian and Tibetan Buddhist texts.

Possession is noted, if not actively discussed, in the earlier strata of Buddhist literature. Although verbal and derivative forms of ā√viś are rarely encountered in the Pāli canon,40 the Mahāsutasoma Jātaka has bhūtapaviṭṭho (Skt. bhūtapraviṣṭaḥ; possessed by a spirit), and the Padakusalamāṇava Jātaka contains the expression “possessed by non-humans” (amanussapariggahītā [Skt. amanuṣya-parigṛhītā]).41 More significant is the Sanskrit phrase ātmabhāvaparigraham (taking possession of a [new] personal existence), appearing as a commentatorial gloss on the word nivesanam in verses 33–34 of the Paramārthagāthās. In a long discussion of this problematic phrase, Lambert Schmithausen concludes that it indicates a tacit assent to entering into a new “life-experience” (ātmabhāva), which is to say a rebirth (thus confirming Gombrich’s observation about the affectivity of the anatta doctrine on future births).42 Schmithausen translates verse 34 as: “[t]hat which has been stuck to [nivesanam] [by them], that the Noble Ones know to be suffering.”43 Niveśanam, infelicitously translated “stuck to,” is related to the sense of the term saṃsārāveśa (immersed in the cycle of rebirth), used in several Hindu devotional texts (see Chapter 9). The emotional weight that we have seen as a significator of āvesa is present in the description of the Buddha’s speech in the Pali Mahāvastu, where it is, in part, called āviṣṭhaṃ (penetrating).44

The great Pāli dictionary by Trenckner et al. lists several references to the verb āvisati, including Digha Nikāya 3.204.17: “This yakṣa seizes, this yakṣa possesses” (ayaṃ yakkho gaṇhati ayaṃ yakkho āvisati). It is striking that both √gṛh and ā√viś are used here, probably for emphasis. In this and several other passages, ā√viś appears in the sense of uninvited possession of the type generally associated with pra√viś in Sanskrit.45 In Buddhism, the yakṣa occasionally supplants the more brahmanical gandharva, and with greater negative consequences.46 In his Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dictionary, Franklin Edgerton cites the Lalitavistara (163.14): āveśād … jinottamānām … adhiṣṭhānena (by the supernatural power of the Buddhas; though he adds that this could mean “because of entrance, possession, on the part of the Buddhas”).47 A later Mahāyāna text, Kṣemendra’s Bodhisattvāvadānakalpalatā (56–57) says: “Saṃyatā, inspirited by a deity [devatāviṣṭaḥ], spoke to him: ‘My Lord, in the world only the enlightened Buddha, engaged in completely eradicating the afflictions of human beings [and] possessing discriminating awareness [and] determination produced from passionlessness, are calm due to peace and contentment.’”48

The situation is more complicated in Tibetan Buddhist texts. The Sanskrit word āveśa is translated in classical Tibetan as lha-babs, which, like āvesa and its variants, is used colloquially, beyond the classical texts.49 The Tibetan gronds-jug is used for forceful entry, roughly corresponding with praveśa, while bzung-ba is close to the Sanskrit grahaṇa.50 Thus, the distinctions between āveśa, praveśa, and grahaṇa are preserved in Tibetan. The primary contexts in which the two former terms are employed are the ritual of introducing, or generating, a deity into an image, corresponding to the Sanskrit prāṇapratiṣṭha (cf. Chapter 10) and conducting one or more deities into an individual through a process of visualization, also called nyāsa. The former, the presence of a deity in an icon or Tantric initiate, is called jñānasattva and the latter, the visualized or generated deity, is called samayasattva.51

Tibetan spirit-mediums (dpa’-bo and lha-pa), formally classified as dharmapālas (guardians of dharma) “are very much part of the folk-religion complex, and there is every reason to assume that they go back to pre-Buddhist times. [But] they are well integrated into the Buddhist religious system, and a number of them reside in monastic temples or gompas and are ordained monks.”52 This presupposes the assumption of full identity of a dharmapāla with a monk, a complete and seemingly permanent possession of a monk by a divine or semidivine being, or the grafting of certain divine qualities associated with dharmapālas onto monks with particular qualifications (Skt. adhikāra). This does not mean, however, that the actions of living dharmapālas are beyond question, because some of the Tibetan Buddhist traditions that accept the possibility and validity of possession states also have a history of skepticism toward it.

The textual bases for the institutionalization of possession in Tibetan Buddhism are difficult to locate beyond the realm of noncanonical tantric texts, many of which are lost or remain unedited, but which we know have affinities with non-Buddhist Tantras from the Indian Himalayas. Some of this material, which is part of an extensive genre of ritual texts that addresses oracular possession, is discussed in Chapter 11. However, we can identify a manifestly eclectic religious complex in which oracular possession is domesticated through ritual, and which appears almost entirely in ritual and (auto-)biographical literature. Thus, Tibetan Buddhist textuality does not sequester the public culture of possession from either descriptions of its mechanics or from theorizing about it, as occurs in most brahmanical literature. Possession is discussed, however, in the Sarvabuddhasamāyogaḍākinījālasaṃvara, an eighth-century text extant only in Tibetan. This text, which David Gray claims “is probably the earliest of the Yoginī tantras,”53 currently exists only in manuscript form. Gray asserts that the Tibetan dbab pa, a derivative of the verb ’bebs pa (to cause to descend), is the Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit āvesa. The Tibetan term, he says, “does not refer to spirit possession per se, but rather the employment of dance to invoke the deity, with whom the practitioner seeks some sort of union in order to achieve the magical powers or siddhis which that deity can bestow.”54 Gray argues that this is not a kind of deity possession in which the practitioner loses consciousness of his or her own identity. On the contrary, it “seems to call for a state of union with the deity that leads to a heightened rather than an occluded state of consciousness.”55 What Gray writes here is consistent with descriptions of shamanic trance. He concludes that Vajrayāna visualization practices had their origin in earlier possession practices.56

The state oracle of Tibet, an important and well-known public figure who hails from the Nechung monastery, near Lhasa, is a good example of a dpa’-bo. Since at least the sixteenth century he has served, in succeeding generations, as a close adviser to the Dalai Lamas. His advice comes through ritualized and highly predictable possession states.57 As a figure whose considerable temporal power arises from his skill at inducing possession states, he does not require strained attempts by the government to justify his position near the center of power in Tibet or in the present-day Tibetan government in exile. The textuality of possession has assured his position. Thus, the oracle does not exist in isolation but is supported by much older, widely distributed possession cults that share a common Buddhist, Himalayan, and Central Asian public and spiritual heritage.

Among the sects of Tibetan Buddhism, the oldest, the Nyingma school, incorporates in its literature a substantial body of noncanonical tantric texts, serving as the primary venue for the narrativization of possession. Much of this echoes historical writing, because it appears in non- or semihagiographical biography or even in autobiography, genres that are sadly deficient in Sanskrit literature. This material, which has been the subject of scholarship only in recent years, is dealt with below, in the course of more detailed discussions of possession as represented in tantric texts. Suffice to say here that these texts bear some of the excitement of ethnography, of thick description. Several reasons may be cited for this, one of which is that they contain elements of criticism and doubt with respect to the experience of possession.58

What is most relevant in the current chapter, however, is to address possession as it appears in doctrinal literature, which in both South Asia and Tibet includes technical manuals on yoga, sometimes presented as formal dialectical argument. One such manual, the Bhāvanākrama (BhK, Stages of Meditation), composed in Sanskrit by the Indian monk and scholiast Kamalaśīla in the late eighth century, bears semantic similarities to texts of classical yoga.59 This text has been relied on by Tibetan Buddhists for centuries, up to the present. It contains three chapters, of which two—the first and third—survive relatively intact in Sanskrit, while the Sanskrit of the second chapter is almost entirely lost. However, a Tibetan translation of the complete work was made quite early, and that survives. The first chapter outlines the goals of Buddhist practice, the second describes the practice, and the third describes the results. The key chapter for our purposes is the second, of which a “restored” Sanskrit text was composed in the twentieth century.60

All three chapters of the text describe a gradualist position in terms of a number of stages of meditation practice. On the one hand, one can argue that the Buddha achieved enlightenment suddenly in one night’s ecstatic experience under a bodhi tree. On the other hand, one can point out that this experience was preceded by performance of considerable austerities and cultivation of mental discipline and that major sections of the Sutta Piṭaka describe stages of this highly contextualized enlightenment experience. What is relevant here is that Kamalaśīla describes the practice of meditation in the familiar language of engrossment, including āveśa. The first section of the BhK states that an aspirant on the path must eventually transcend the notions that substances and qualities possess any kind of true nature (sarvadharmaniḥsvabhāvatā) and that nondual experience should be a soteriological goal. Then, after becoming absorbed in the highest truth (paramatattvapraveśāt), the aspirant enters into absorption without options, choices, or the possibilities of construction or representation (nirvikalpasamādhipraveśaḥ). In this way, one becomes established in the supreme truth and “sees” (sa paśyati) Mahāyāna.61 The use of praveśa here is, of course, conventional, but it also suggests a dualism akin to that found in the Upaniṣad: that substantialities or states, regardless of their relation to the perceiver—whether they are self-created (e.g., by Brahmā) or incidental—or whether they are real, unreal, illusory, or mere constructions, are (at least conventionally) separate from the cognizer and may be entered or possessed, resulting in a state of full identity, or, perhaps better, nondifferentiation. “Seeing” Mahāyāna, then, is much like yogic or folk possession, in which, for example, seeing the Goddess is tantamount to seeing through the eyes of the Goddess. In the BhK, nirvikalpasamādhi is not just a state in which the cognizer sees Mahāyāna, but one in which Mahāyāna sees itself. BhK part 3 describes this identity slightly differently: “One who [understands his] nature as an absence of personhood [pudgaladharmanairātmyām] has crossed over to the truth.”62

The second chapter of the BhK is filled with terms of experience that suggest an affinity with the language, and doubtless the ethos, of late first-millennium Indic devotion. This is the language of bhāva, bhāvanā, and other derivatives of the verbal root √bhū (to become). Bhāva indicates a mood, an attitude, or a state of being (avasthā), while bhāvanā indicates an experiential mode, usually a meditative state, uses to which we have seen these words put in the Hindu Yogavāsiṣṭha above.63 These terms are discussed more fully below when addressing possession as a mode of devotion; it is important here to note that they are closely associated with āveśa in bhakti texts and praveśa in Buddhism. One passage in the BhK liberally employs the terms praveśa and bhāvanā: “After the appearance of that knowledge, one enters into it [praveśaḥ] directly.” This refers to the knowledge gained from the practice of the stages of meditation. “Then, after entering [praviśya] into the first stage, one should next resort to the path of meditation [bhāvanāmārge] in which the stages on the path of meditation [bhāvanākrama] consist of wisdom [prajñā] meditation and method [upāya] meditation. This should be achieved by both transcendence of the world [lokottara] and knowledge gained in its aftermath. Because of purification of the subtlest obstructions that have accumulated because of not practicing meditation [bhāvanāpraheya], one will obtain the highest unique attributes [guṇa]. By purifying the lower stages one is possessed of [praviśya] the knowledge of the tathāgatas, crosses over the ocean of omniscience, and completely fulfills one’s goals.”64

Several other passages referring to meditative states or practices may be noted. One passage speaks of maitrībhāvanā (love or friendliness as a practice), performed with the wish that all beings achieve happiness (bodhicitta).65 In another, Kamalaśīla cites the Ratnamegha Sūtra on entering a noncontingent, signless (nirnimitta) state of yoga. He remarks that “thoughtful reflection is the preparation for entering into this state of noncontingency [nirnimittatāpraveśam].”66 In another passage, the BhK states, “when one sees that the mind is not fully engaged, one should realize the benefits of samādhi, then cause the mind to become [bhāvayet] engaged.”67 The BhK recommends a balance between the practice of alert and active insight (vipaśyanā) and the practice of tranquility or quiescence (śamatha): “When one embarks on both equally, then one should remain in that state without embellishing it, so long as there is no physical or mental discomfort.”68 In fact, the main point of the BhK is that both prajñā (wisdom) and upāya (practice), as well as vipaśyanā and śamatha, are necessary for attaining enlightenment. Kamalaśīla quotes the Ratnakūṭa to the effect that one cannot become absorbed into nirvāṇa (nirvāṇapraveśaḥ) through cultivation of emptiness alone.69 It requires a well-rounded approach.
