+++
title = "06 Conclusions"

+++
Despite the preceding discussions, it must be stated that possession was barely a blip on the philosophical screen in India. It was not problematized or thematized on its own merit, and when it was addressed at all it was out of necessity, because the authors of earlier texts mentioned it. When it was regarded categorically (as has always been the wont of Indian sastra), as it was in the Yogasūtras and Brahmasūtras, possession was assigned fuzzy ontological or soteriological characteristics rather than epistemological ones (perhaps Hemacandra and the Yogavāsiṣṭha aside). It lay within the realm of active human experience, an area prone to ontological and soteriological categorization. It was not presented as a topic germane for philosophical analysis in part because it was not considered empirically reproducible. Thus it was not a philosophical notion that could even awkwardly be assigned its own niche in philosophical composition. In this way, it lay at the periphery of such discourse, which, at least within the advancing genre of sastra, employed soteriology only as a framing device within which philosophers could address more pressing epistemological symmetries. But, as elsewhere in Indian literature, it forced its way in asymmetrically, haphazardly. Neither Yoga, Vedānta, Jainism, or Buddhism could easily discard the realm of human experience from their discourse, dealing as they purported to with notions of enlightenment or, more precisely, release from individually forged bondage to the nettlesome and ever-recurring phenomenal world.

Thus, systematic philosophy could not successfully escape responding to the individual; failure to do so would have constituted an egregious ethical oversight, even for systems in which ethics was not central (yet into which one can read an assumed ethics into the texts).70 And, as noted here, this was largely because the foundational texts forced them to examine the individual. In this way, the discourse of systematic philosophy was unable to escape its full commitment to responding to foundational texts—in the present cases the Brahmasūtras, Upaniṣads, Yogasūtras, and early Buddhist texts. These early texts forced generations of philosophers into the realm of questions regarding personal identity and possibility, at least occasionally, and away from totalizing concerns with the more remote abstractions that were the tools of their trade. In this way, philosophers could not expunge possession from their textuality, much less, we expect, from the religious and cultural worldviews that undergirded them. Hence, they exploited possession (as well as certain other phenomenological issues within the religious domain) only to the extent that it could shed light on other, more central, issues, such as the nature of mind, the relationship between mind, body and experience, and the nature of suffering.

What interceded to bring the worlds of human concern and philosophical analysis more closely together was the inescapable narrativity of religious culture. Śaṅkara the possessor of the dead king Amaruka impinged on the life—and inevitably the reception of the work—of Śaṅkara the philosopher, while Padmasambhava the tantric exorcist impinged on the careers of the theoreticians Śāntarakṣita and Kamalaśīla. The former—in both cases—provided working space for the latter. Regardless of whether we accept the hagiographies at their word (and we are in no position to do so), Śaṅkara’s (purported) possession and Padmasambhava’s (purported) exorcisms doubtless contributed to their public cachet; and even if these stories were conceived and circulated only after their deaths, both appear to have been sufficiently powerful figures in their own time for these or similar legends to arise and contribute to a popular groundswell of support for them. Possession and exorcism, at least according to religious narrative, proved to be strategies as effective for gaining knowledge as was the study of philosophy (vide Śaṅkara’s acquisition of kāmaśāstra). Furthermore, it is likely that neither Śaṅkara nor Padmasambhava would hesitate to employ religious, which is to say yogic or tantric, means for propagating their philosophical doctrines. This is an old strategy in India, going back to the Brāhmaṇas, Upaniṣads, MBh, and early Buddhist texts. We have also seen that neither Patañjali nor Hemacandra felt any contradiction between extreme religious practice and mainstream philosophical discourse. Possession and exorcism, accepting for the moment their facticity, or at least the facticity of their demonstrations and the public culture supporting them, was doubtless regarded as radical or extreme. And it is no secret in either classical or contemporary South Asia that philosophers, religious leaders, and other members of the literati have embraced, even encouraged, extreme practices, even if it is usually off the record, so to speak. Extremism would include possession, most other yogic siddhis, difficult austerities undertaken in jungles, left-handed (vāmācāra) or Pāsupata practices, and so on, that captured the imagination, practices that people would not want members of their own family to perform but that were culturally reconciled by their inclusion in authoritative texts. It was permitted, even encouraged, to imagine and think about these things and attribute them to great teachers, even if their practice was at the outer limits of social and spiritual acceptability. The letter of the law was rarely the rule within the ashram; the cloistered life, even if lived openly in the spirit of brahmanical restraint, embraced elements of transgressiveness and active imagination. What could be normative in literature—for example, possession, asceticism, or starvation—was surely extreme or radical in the world. Thus brahmans and Jainas could map out strategies for possession that did not contradict their philosophical or ethical principles.

A tradition of long standing in India is that teachers within all lineages of practice (meditation, yoga, etc.) invariably strive to locate their practices in established texts. We might label this “religion in search of a philosophy,” and rarely if ever have lineage holders or isolated charismatic teachers been short on justification for their often idiosyncratic or self-revealed teachings or practices. Thus, philosophers did not reject out of hand the practice of possession as strongly as the caricature of orthodoxy might suggest; rather, they selectively or passively advocated certain practices that did not blatantly contravene their ideas. Both brahmanical and Buddhist doctrinal traditions embrace a multivocality that, in the words of Todd Lewis, “highlight the problematic historical method of relying on the voices of ascetic monks and nuns to understand how the faith informed an ethos of living in the world as a ‘good Buddhist”71 (or a good Hindu). Thus the YS precedes the sūtra on possession with a simple, if ambiguous, warning: “These powers [vibhūti] are obstructions to samādhi but accomplishments when the mind is active.”72 The YS does not condemn these practices but, rather, recommends them in selective situations. Śaṅkara and others recorded only their ontologies and epistemologies, stating that practice must be based on the Upaniṣads, Buddhist texts, and so on. But they rarely described forbidden practices. They knew that their philosophical ideas emerged from the richness of life experience and, in turn, encouraged experiential experimentation, at least up to a point.73 No Indian philosopher composed an odium theologicum against possession or any other specific practice, as did Christian theologians and missionaries.

This may be further seen in the diction of experience, especially in the use of the verb bhu in all its senses of “becoming.” What is perhaps surprising to students of Indic religion is how ubiquitously this terminology is employed in Buddhist texts of the second half of the first millennium C.E. What this suggests is that Buddhism included a strong devotional component, while bhakti included a formal meditational component. Both of these, of course, are well known; for example, the Bhāvanākrama cites the Sarvadharmasaṃgrahavaipulya Sūtra on the necessity of a diversity of practices that have already inscribed in them a strong, if often unstated, devotional component.74 Conversely, many bhakti texts define standards of devotion specifically while assuming a diversity of practices that develop different experiential modes.75 I suspect that the identity of idiom indicates that there was a connection, even a reciprocity, between them in ways that have been hitherto unexplored. In any event, what this discussion demonstrates is a carefully constructed juxtaposition between the realms of the individual in the world of relationships, which includes possession as a mode of relation in the private world of the individual, a connection between the spheres of practice and theory that is closer than has been recognized.76
