+++
title = "01 Embodiment and Disembodiment Among the Ṛṣis"

+++

The vedic literature from the Ṛgveda (ṚV) to the classical Upaniṣads is the earliest source of information on possession in India. It is also among the most unambiguous. Because one of the principal arguments of this book is that there is a recognizable “tradition” of possession in India, it is necessary to say a few words about the early relationship between the folk and the classical as this bears greatly on any allegation of a tradition widely regarded as an experiential phenomenon with a popular discourse that largely bypasses ancient and classical literature. I say this in spite of all the evidence adduced in the following chapters, because most of these texts, or at least the passages cited in them, exist on the periphery of mainstream classical literature, by which I here mean śāstra.

If an argument can be made for a convergence, or indeed an identity, of the folk and the classical in India, the Vedas are a fine place to begin. What transformed folk into classical was not appropriation of folk material by a brahman literati, but the dynamics of preservation between the cognitive and narrative aspects of literary production. Three examples of these dynamics may be cited. The first occurs in the Ṛgveda, which became classical through oral preservation and whose primary focal points—uniquely configured mythology and ritual—were blurred and transfigured in later thinking and literature in spite of a perfectly preserved textuality. Imagine if the text of the ṚV were lost three millennia ago and our only knowledge of Indra was as a defeated, degraded, and depraved warrior with a disfiguring exoskeleton of thousands of vaginas and our only knowledge of the soma pressing ritual were as a primeval and highly unlikely foil for the practices of Krishna devotion! Indra the warrior, valorous king of the vedic divinities, who slaughtered Vṛtra the serpent demon with his mace and liberated the cosmic waters, was a heroic and epic figure, while the disfigured Indra of later centuries was, at best, an antihero. In both cases, however, Indra found an outlet in the creative flux of brahmanical literary mythologizing. The same can be said for classical vedic ritual, which was, on the one hand, preserved through brahmanical textualizing and highly guarded ritual practice and, on the other, was fragmented and spread about in later, more accessible, forms of Indic ritual.

The second example is the narrative line of the Mahābhārata, preserved with sufficient clarity and uniformity by the written Sanskrit text in its many recensions to render a critical edition conceivable.1 This may be compared to folk Mahābhāratas, which diverge markedly from the Sanskrit original, the best known of which, thanks to the work of Alf Hiltebeitel, is that of the Draupadī cult in Tamilnadu. Imagine, for example, that our received MBh depicted a cowardly Arjuna living in a tree and a fierce blood-drinking Draupadī leading the possessed Pāṇḍava army in a victorious romp across burning embers!2

Third, consider ascetic practices recorded in the early Upaniṣads and Buddhist texts that enable one to speak of “classical” Indian meditative or ascetic experiences and practices.3 Although most of these grew out of ideas and practices mentioned in the Brāhmaṇa literature or were the heritage of the Jainas and others in reaction to the religious culture of the Vedas, they bore an energy and relevance at the time that can never abide in the classical alone. Similarly, possession that today is identified as folk may be recognized, at least approximately, in the Vedas, even if the texts of the Vedas are not recognized in possession.

According to received tradition, the first to be possessed were none other than the ṛṣis themselves, who saw the Veda. Not only does the word ṛṣi itself seem to hark back to an ecstatic sage,4 similarly vipra, which etymologically means “quiverer,”5 but the Hindu tradition, following the sūtras and commentaries of the Pūrvamīmāṃsā, has it that they saw or cognized the eternal mantras, rather than composed them. Francis X. Clooney notes appositely that the ṛṣis were “merely ‘enlisted’ to pronounce the vedic words and hand them down, to make sure the text is known and able to be regularly translated into action. The words are not expressions of human wisdom and are not to be interpreted as statements of human values and goals.”6 The ṛṣis were thus innocent (if enlightened) bystanders, through whom knowledge incidentally flowed.

Another important and well-known term is apauruṣeya, used in the Pūrvamīmāṃsā “simply to dismiss the possibility that the ṛṣis might have a creative or authorial function in regard to the text.”7 The gods are also denied an authorial role in the Pūrvamīmāṃsā, thus distinguishing the notion of vedic textual reception or cognition from more normative ideas of possession, which require the mediation of another being.8 Although the apauruṣeyatva of the Pūrvamīmāṃsā was a concept designed to demonstrate the primacy of sound and word, shifting responsibility away from the individual human center,9 it nevertheless illustrates the tendency toward disembodied manifestation. Thus one might say that as the concept of vedic cognition was itself emblematic of a culture ripe for possession, that it is a correlate, and, in this case, a prerequisite, to the notion of possession.
