+++
title = "03 Shape-Shifting and Possession"

+++
Sāyaṇa understands the last quarter-verse of ṚV 10.136.2 differently, avoiding any suggestion of possession. He says: “[the munis] entered the deity’s own physical form” (devatāsvarūpaṃ prāviśan). This is slightly ambiguous, but he probably means here that the munis assumed or constructed a form of the deity rather than merged with a pre-existing divine body.47 The former is more likely because Sāyaṇa consistently avoids speaking of possession, while he readily acknowledges shape-shifting—which is in any case much in evidence in the vedic and post-vedic literature. This example demonstrates that shape-shifting was proximate to possession and perhaps indistinguishable from it in certain contexts, especially in the early history of Sanskrit literature when the vocabulary for the two was not fully differentiated. Although it is unwise to get too far ahead of ourselves, it may be useful to note here an example of this lexical differentiation. The much later Jain Pārśvanātha Caritra distinguishes between shape-shifting (rūpāntarakṛti) and entering another’s body (parakāyapraveśa).48 Another reason for arguing in favor of possession rather than shape-shifting in the case of the muni is that he is, unmistakably, an ascetic, and merging with or becoming possessed by a deity was more likely for such a figure than was shape-shifting, which signifies greater stakes in worldly pursuits than those that the muni appears to have.

Shape-shifting is most often a strategy for subterfuge, adopted to present a persona to the world or to a particular individual different from one’s own given or recognized form. Occasionally it is employed for other strategic purposes, such as assuming a shape that is more suitable for a specific physical medium or situation, for example, changing into the form of a bird in order to fly through the air. However, it does not encompass internal shifts of identity or transformations of mental and psychological states that are characteristic of possession, even if it enhances the individual’s power—and it is clear in the present instance that the muni is not concerned with his physical appearance; rather, he enters the form of the god in order to enhance his ecstatic state. In addition, shape-shifting is limited almost entirely to celestial beings, who already command considerable power and charisma, while possession always requires at least one human. To the best of my knowledge, there is no literary or oral record of a deity or spirit’s possessing another deity or spirit. In the ṚV, Indra is the god who most often resorts to shape-shifting, a strategy that he has developed for enhancing his own power:

ṚV 3.53.8ab:	rūpáṃrūpaṃ maghávā bobhavīti māyḥ kṛṇvānás tanvàṃ pari svm |

Maghavān constantly changes form, rendering his own body completely magical.

In another rather elliptical passage, the sage announces that his hymn is in praise of Indra, who manifests various forms within his daughter’s womb (vakṣáṇāsu [interior spaces]):

ṚV 5.42.13:	prá sú mahé suśaraṇya medhṃ gīram bhare návyasīṃ jyamānām | yá āhan duhitúr vakṣáṇāsu rūp minānó ákṛṇod idáṃ naḥ ||

My latest cognition, my hymn, that is now arising within me, I bestow upon the great one who offers safe refuge [Indra], the striker, who has created all this, whose forms are knit within the womb of his daughter.

Indra’s reputation for incest, even at this early date, surely inspired this trope. It is likely that the daughter is the earth, and her wantonness the earth’s fertility. Indra’s virility and his prowess at shape-shifting are reconfigured as his power to produce varied forms within and on the earth.49

The purpose of shape-shifting is usually to accomplish a specific deed wherein a prior intentional or psychological state is aided by a more appropriate and powerful physical form. Several stories from the Mahābhārata, Rāmāyaṇa, and elsewhere, some dependent on vedic exemplars, bear this out. In one story (MBh 3.197) Indra assumes the shape of a hawk and Agni the shape of a pigeon in order to test Śibi. In another (MBh 14.55, 58), Indra tests Uttaṇka by adopting the form of a Cāṇḍāla and offering him nectar (amṛta) in the form of urine. In the Rāmāyaṇa Hanumān often expands or contracts his body in encounters with inimical beings. For example, he defeats but nevertheless gains the blessing of Surasā, the “mother of snakes,” through expanding and contracting in order to enter and exit her mouth, and he kills the rākṣasī Siṃhikā by entering her with his tiny form and piercing hervital organs (Rām 5.1.130–178).50 He is called kāmarūpin (Rām 5.5.1), one who has the ability to change his form at will. In one passage, he morphs into a mendicant from a mountain called Ṛṣyamūka in order to help Sugrīva, and there refers to himself as kāmarūpin (Rām 4.3.21) .51 In the Bhāgavata Purāṇa (BhP) retelling of a very old story that has its roots in the ṚV and middle vedic literature, the sage Cyavana, old and wrinkled, was married to the “beautiful maiden” Sukanyā, the daughter of King Śaryāti. Not thinking himself fit for such a wife, he offered soma libations to the celestial physicians, the Aśvinīkumāras, though he knew that they were technically ineligible. In exchange, the Aśvinīkumāras promised to return him to his youth. And thus it happened. But Indra objected and tried to kill Cyavana with his vajra. Not only did he fail in this mission, but Cyavana paralyzed Indra’s arm, forcing his vajra to drop helplessly to the ground. Ever after, all the gods have agreed to grant a libation of soma to the Aśvins (MhP 9.3.1–26).52

Two related cases of shape-shifting, or at least of ethereal transformation, that serve positively charged ritual and brahmaṇical goals, are recounted in the Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa (JB, 2.53–54)53 and the Jaiminīya Upaniṣad Brāhmaṇa (JUB, 3.6.1–3).54 They both involve Keśin Dārbhya, a king of the Kuru-Pāñcāla clan, who, in the JB story, unsuccessfully attempts to initiate himself into the vedic sacrificial ritual and, in the story from the JUB, encounters the ghost of his beloved uncle, the late king of the Kurus, Ucchaiḥśravas Kaupapeya, in the forest while on a hunting expedition. In the JB Keśin is taught the proper mantras of consecration by the ghost of his late uncle, who appears to him, having assumed the form of a golden bird. In the JUB, Keśin is overjoyed to see the figure of his uncle roaming the forest. Keśin attempts to embrace him but fails, because Uccaiḥśravas does not have a tangible body. In order to embrace his uncle and join him in the world of the gods, Keśin, by now an advanced vedic ritualist, needs a brahman officiant to “shake off my bodies with a disembodying Sāmavedic chant” (sa me ’śarīreṇa, sāmnā śarīrāṇy adhūnot; JUB 3.6.1.2). These tales of Keśin Dārbhya argue for the legitimacy of disembodied sources of knowledge; at the very least, they display a sense of discarnate spirits, conceived as epistemological units detached from the physical body and capable of ousting the consciousness of any human being, and therefore capable of possessing it. Because of the fluidity of form and identity, disembodiment here partakes of aspects of both shape-shifting and possession. The shape-shifting is clear, especially when the spirit of Uccaiḥśravas adopts the shape of a golden bird, a clearly wrought symbol of the achievement of a divine afterlife. The territory of possession is the assumption of a multiplicity of bodies.

J. C. Heesterman often points out that the unitary world envisioned in the Vedas consists of a seamless flow of multiple and often contradictory parts. Both the world and the individual depicted in the early and middle vedic texts are constructed of incompatible principles that express ambivalence and conflict. The irony, cohesiveness, and flow of this complex whole was, according to Heesterman, subverted first by the “classical” vedic ritual and then by the Upaniṣads, with their procrustean application of an “unforgiving transcendent order.”55 This transcendent order adopted as ideology became brahmanism, which, as Gombrich supposed, inculcated control. This it did, says Gombrich, in part by denying all value to possession states. We might ask here, however, how true this really was. No doubt, brahmanism was an increasingly conservative intellectual and cultural movement that denied many of the less-Sanskritic elements of Indian social, intellectual, and spiritual culture. It also exploited its custody of literature and literacy in order to tilt Indian culture to the social and material advantage of brahmans. And, in no small measure, this required the denial of public forms of self-expression and empowerment, including possession. However, before the philosophy and theology of the Vedas and Upaniṣads devolved into brahmanism, possession was recognized, even embraced by brahmans. This was before the folk had parted company with the Sanskritic. We have already seen that the ṚV and other early and middle vedic texts recognize and even celebrate possession. An example of an endorsement of it in the systematic philosophy of the Upaniṣads occurs in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.2.5), which states: “The wise, their selves controlled, when they attain him [puruṣa] altogether, he who is present in All, they enter into [āviśtmti] that very All.”56 This is to say, the wise, though controlled, become possessed by that wholeness (sarvam), which is both personified and universalized as the cosmic man (puruṣa). Their very being becomes indistinguishable from that wholeness, and they become its instrument. Although brahmanism here undeniably inculcates control, it also recognizes possession and the possibility of a general transformation of personality. This is a philosophical presupposition of Keśin Dārbhya in the JUB passage cited above. In the JUB, possession was an assumed prefiguration to shape-shifting. As a ritualist familiar with the consumption of soma and the deeds of Indra, Keśin believed that minds and bodies could be taken over by powerful forces and dissolved by disembodiment chants.

In most states of possession, the mask, either actual (as often occurs in ritualized possession)57 or psychological, is not a masquerade. It is not an act of deception, as in the case of shape-shifting, but denotes a real, if temporary, shift in identity and perspective. In shape-shifting, the personality, which remains intact to the experiencer, is revealed to the observer only after the mask has fallen away. In one of the instances of shape-shifting from the MBh noted above, in which Indra assumes the shape of a hawk and Agni the shape of a pigeon in order to test King Śibi, Indra and Agni—who are gods and therefore blessed with nonchanging forms (occasional injuries, curses, and afflictions aside)—must maintain their masks, lest their identities be revealed. In contrast, drawing from another example cited above, the sage Cyavana’s shape is changed (his youth is restored), seemingly permanently (until he grows old again), as a gift in return for granting the Aśvinīkumāras the gift of soma. Yet the form of the muni, who, possessed by the deity, rides the wind, does not undergo any change as a result of his experience, nor does that of the ritualist who has drunk soma, nor do those possessed in any of the examples noted below. Both shape-shifting and possession confer an uneasy power, but only in the latter case is core identity at stake. This hints at a precarious—and curious—relationship between physical and personal identity: Personal identity is transformed through possession, but not through shape-shifting, while shape-shifting is always a ruse and does not appear to induce any transformation of personal identity.

Doubtless, personal identity can shift more easily in mythic than in human contexts, because myth encourages a more flexible material framework on which to fix identity. But the mythic and the human are blurred in ritual, where the identity of human actors can appear to shift like autumn winds (or like myth), through a system of specific coordinates that lies behind the shifts, as one should expect in India, waiting to be deciphered. Both the textuality and practice of vedic ritual, and the textuality and practice of the MBh, Rām, and Purāṇas in their wake,58 are replete with examples of possession and (at least prescribed) shape-shifting. Apparently, the attention paid to ritual detail and etiquette does not interfere with the emotional urgency required for possession in any of these instances,59 though to be sure this urgency has been drained from vedic ritual practice as part of the supersession of rule and control that became an oppressive feature of brahmanism.

One of the most frequent mantras prescribed in the Yajurvedic ritual literature lies at the cusp of possession and shape-shifting. The Taittirīya Saṃhitā prescribes the following for recitation during a number of ritual acts preliminary to the offerings themselves, such as while lifting a pot of ghee or a riceflour ball (puroḍāśa): “On the impulse of the God Savitṛ, with the arms of the Aśvins, with the hands of Pūṣan, I take thee” (devasya tvā savituḥ prasave ’śvinor bāhubhyāṃ püṣṇo hastābhyām ā dade; TS 1.3.1.1, 7.1.11.1) .60 Thus it is not the officiant alone who takes up the ghee, but the officiant as composite deity who performs the actions through the body of the officiant. This mantra, more than any other, served as the paradigm for the process of divinization of the body called nyāsa (setting down, imposition), which was to become one of the trademarks of Hindu daily ritual and Tantric practice.61 I deal with nyāsa extensively later, in discussions of possession in Tantra; it is sufficient to mention here that it is a uniquely brahmanical subcategory of possession, one in which transformation of form is thought, even prescribed, to accompany possession. The composite nature of personal identity expressed in this mantra, various deities together with a human actor who is not thoroughly occluded, but remains capable of making decisions and following learned ritual patterns, is quite in keeping with much of the possession performance in the ethnographies. For the extraordinary degree to which personal identity is reassigned in this composite manner in vedic ritual, one need search no farther than any Śrautasūtra on the New and Full Moon Sacrifices (darśapūrṇamāsau),62 in which this mantra is often employed. Because this mantra is presented in a prescriptive rather than a descriptive context, terms such as āveśa are notably absent.63

One example of the extension of this mantra and corresponding notion of multiform identity into a later mythic setting will suffice. In a myth with a venerable vedic and Purāṇic pedigree, Śiva was excluded from Dakṣa’s sacrifice.64 As a result, he wreaked havoc on the sacrifice and, among other things, chopped off the arms and hands of some of the officiants, as well as the head of Dakṣa himself. In order to have the sacrifice completed after he was finally, and grudgingly, admitted into it, Śiva decreed:

BhP 4.7.5:	bāhubhyām aśvinoḥ pūṣṇo hastābhyām kṛṭavāhavaḥ | bhavantv adhvaryavaś cānye bastaśmaśrur bhṛgur bhavet ||65

The adhvaryus and other ritual officiants should carry on their duties with the arms of the Aśvins and with the hands of Pūṣan, and let Bhṛgu have the beard of a billy-goat.

Eventually the decapitated head of the sacrificial goat was joined with the body of the beheaded Dakṣa (Bhṛgu). The relevant point of this story is that the feared and ferocious Śiva wields the power to curse and destroy, but he leaves the marks of divinity in the wake of his curse and destruction, even if these marks are also embarrassing stigmata of pain and humiliation.

Another example of such divine and human collusion, also intended for the New and Full Moon Sacrifices (and elsewhere as well), is given in the Taittirīya Brāhmaṇa where the sacrificer addresses deity-ancestors and ancestor-deities:

TB 3.7.5.4–5:	yò ’hám asmi sá sán yaje | yasysmi ná tám antár emi | sváṃ ma iṣṭá sváṃ dattá sváṃ pūrtá svám śrāntá sváṃ hutám | tásya me ’gnír upadraṣṭ vāyúr upaśrot ādityò ’nukhyāt dyáuḥ pit pṛthiv māt prajápatir bándhuḥ yá evsmi sá sán yaje |

Being the one I am, I sacrifice. I do not go beyond the one to whom I belong. I have offered what is mine, I have given what is mine, I have conferred as largesse what is mine, I have offered as oblation what is mine. Of this, Agni is the eyewitness, Vāyu the one who hears it, Śditya the one who announces it, Heaven the father, Earth the mother, Prajāpati the kinsman. I sacrifice, being the one who I am.66

Who is this sacrificer and how is it that the ritual becomes so efficient? The answers, according to the TB, are that the sacrificer is in some sense a multiform, a composite entity of all of these gods. He “seizes Agni” (both the devatā and the fire) and thus the remaining gods “in their own abode” (agníṃ gṛhṇāti sá evāyátane devátāḥ pári gṛhṇāti; TS 1.6.7.1–2). It is possible to argue that a supplicant’s conviction of a deity’s control over his or her actions, and a ritualized verbal recognition of the deity’s sovereignty, is not the same as either shape-shifting or possession. This may be the case in the Western notions of possession or shape-shifting derived from ethnographic observation and analysis, but it does not appear true of India. This is probably true of classical India, where the category of possession was quite broad, and partly overlapped with the category of shape-shifting.
