+++
title = "04 In the Beginning, God Possessed Heaven and Earth"

+++

Possession is, first and foremost, a quality of embodiment. It may be a uniquely configured embodiment or, under certain conditions, a viewpoint on embodiment. Embodiment is characterized in the Upaniṣads as primordial, archetypal: It happened in the beginning. In that beginning, bráhman, the eternal, absolute, unlimited power, was anthropomorphized, even humanized, by manifesting recognizable qualities such as desire and fear, as púruṣa, the first and supreme person. This neuter bráhman, with or without its masculine cloak as púruṣa, desired multiplicity, thus entered, embodied, and animated an equally primordial, if initially inert, materiality. The bráhman then divided its newly adopted body into male and female, then into all different types of sexually differentiated beings. This primordial embodiment and subsequent mixing and recombinant identities is at the basis of the Indian notions of multiple and polyvalent selves. This is a self that cannot be expressed except through its multiformity—and which is therefore not reducible except by recapturing its archetypal nature through philosophical understanding or spiritual exercise. Embodiment or animation, however, in its multiform complexity, is irreducible in and to its essences without a termination in the form of death, which returns the materiality of an embodied individual to its primordial quiescence and latency. Archetypal embodiment, then, is also archetypal possession, serving as a model for the flow and exchange of substances, substance codes, and essences, which affect other psychophysical organisms for the duration of their shared locus. However, even on the eventual (and inevitable) separation of substances, this flow and exchange to a great extent produces the unique identity of every embodied individual.

The most productive way to comprehend this primordial possession is by observing it at work in the vedic texts. Most of the important passages are found in the Upaniṣads, and for this I have depended largely on the recent translations of Patrick Olivelle. Let us begin, however, with a passage from the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa, which relates how bráhman first saw this world, vacant and inert, and wondered how to bring it to life.

ŚB 11.2.3.1–3:	bráhma v idam ágra āsīt | tád devn asṛjata | tád devn sṛṣṭvaiṣú lokéṣu vyrohayat | asmínn evá loké ’gním vāyúm antárikṣe divy èva sryam ||1|| átha yé ’ta ūrdhv lokḥ | tad yā áta ūrdhv devátāḥ | téṣu t devátā vyrohayat | sa yáthā haivèmá ávírlok imś ca devátāḥ | evám u haiva tá āvírloks ts ca devátāḥ | yéṣu t devátā vyrohayat ||2|| átha bráhmaivá parārdhám agacchat tatparārdháCaṃkam gatvàikṣata | kathaṃ nv ìmān lokn pratyáveyām íti | taddvbhyām evá pratyávait | rpeṇa caiva nmnā ca … ||3||

(1) In the beginning [all] this was bráhman. It created the gods. Having created the gods, it made them ascend into these worlds: Agni into this world, Vāyu into the midregion, Sūrya into the heavens. (2) There are worlds above these, as there are deities above these: He made these deities ascend into them. Just as these worlds and these deities are manifest, those worlds and those deities are manifest. (3) Bráhman alone went to the sphere beyond. Having gone to that sphere beyond, bráhman considered, “How indeed can I again descend into these worlds?” It descended by means of these two alone—visible appearance and name.67

The Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad (BĀU) describes the differentiation of the “single body in the shape of a man” (ātmaivedam agra āsīt puruṣavishaḥ, 1.4.1). It—he, really—perceived his singularity, discovered fear and pleasure, then split into two, creating husband and wife. They copulated, creating humans first, then “every other pair that exists, down to ants” (evam eva yad idaṃ kiṃca mithunam ā pipīlikābhyas tatsarvam asṛjata, 1.4.4). This puruṣa then churned Agni “from his mouth as if a vagina” (abhyamanthat sa mukhāc ca yoniḥ, 1.4.6), and from his semen created Soma (tad retaso ’sṛjata | tad u somaḥ, 1.4.6). These two, Agni and Soma, are the great polarity of vedic thought: heat and cold, dry and wet, the two forces that the ritualist strives to balance. “Food is nothing but Soma, and Agni is the eater of food” (soma evānnam agnir annādaḥ, 1.4.6).

BĀU 1.4.7	tad dhedam tarhy avyākṛtam āsīt | tan nāmarūpābhyām eva vyākriyatāsaunāmāyam idarūpa iti | tad idam apy etarhi nāmarūpābhyām eva vyākriyate ’saunāmāyam idarūpa iti | sa eṣa iha praviṣṭa ā nakhāgrebhyo yathā kṣuraḥ kṣuradhāne ’vahitaḥ syād viśvaṃbharo vā viśvaṃharakulāye | taṃ na paśyanti | akṛtsno hi saḥ | prāṇann eva prāṇo nāma bhavati vadan vāk paśyaś cakṣuḥ śṛṇvañ chrotraṃ manvāno manaḥ | tāny asyaitāni karmanāmāny eva |

At that time this world was without real distinctions; it was distinguished simply in terms of name and form—” He is so and so by name and has this sort of an appearance.” So even today this world is distinguished simply in terms of name and form, as when we say, “He is so and so by name and has this sort of an appearance.” Penetrating this body up to the very nailtips, he remains there like a razor within a case or an earthbound creature within its nest. People do not see him, for he is incomplete. When he is breathing, he is called breath; when speaking, speech; when hearing, ear; when thinking, mind. These are only the names of his many activities.68

The central point of the BĀU passage is reiterated in the first verse of the Īśā Upaniṣad: “This whole world is to be dwelt in by the Lord, whatever living being there is in the world” (íśāvāsyam ida sarvaṃ yatkiṃca jagatyām jagat).69 This may be the most succinct statement of vedic theism, in which the Lord (íśā) entered, permeated, possessed, and animated the inert world.

The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (ŚvetU) state that the world has become full (pūrṇam) with that puruṣa, with the strong implication that all this (idaṃ sarvam) stood empty before being pervaded by that great being.

ŚvetU 3.9:	yasmāt paraṃ nāparam asti kiṃcid yasmān nāṇīyo na jyāyo ’sti kiṃcit | vṛkṣeva stabdho divi tiṣṭhaty ekas tenedaṃ pūrṇaṃ puruṣeṇa sarvam ||

All this is full with that Person, the one beyond whom there is no other; beneath whom there is nothing; smaller than whom there is nothing; larger than whom there is nothing; and who stands in heaven, firm as a tree.70

The Chāndogya Upaniṣad (ChU) states that this puruṣa then not only created three distinct types of beings and entered them in order to confer upon them name and form, but refers to the primeval beings of all these three divisions as deities. This is the only instance I know of in which a vedic (or any other) text speaks of a deity’s possessing another deity.

ChU 6.3.1–3:	teṣāṃ khalv eṣāṃ bhūtānāṃ trīny eva bījāni bhavanty aṇḍajaṃ jīvajam udbhijjam iti | seyaṃ devataikṣata hantāham imās tisro devatānena jīvenātmanānupraviśya nāmarūpe vyākaravāṇīti | tāsāṃ trivṛtaṃ trivṛtam ekaikāṃ karavāṇīti | seyaṃ devatemās tisro devatā anenaiva jīvenātmanānupraviśya nāmarūpe vyākarot | tāsāṃ trivṛtaṃ trivṛtam ekaikāṃ karavāṇīti |

With respect to these, then, of these beings there are only three kinds of seeds: They can be born from eggs, from living individuals, or from sprouts. Then that same deity thought to itself: “Come now, why don’t I establish the distinctions of name and form by entering these three deities here with this living self [jīvenātmanā], and make each of them threefold.” So, that deity established the distinctions of name and form by entering these three deities here with this living self, and made each of them threefold.71

This is likely nothing more than a trope, however, a manner of speaking, a divinization of the world and the body that characterized much of later brahmanical (and tantric) thought. The Aitareya Upaniṣad (AiU) tells of the origin of the composite being, the man composed of deities, but clearly directed by the one original deity. See, for instance, AiU I.1.1: “In the beginning this world was the self [ātman], one alone, and there was no other being at all that blinked an eye. He thought to himself: ‘Let me create the worlds’” (ātmā vā idam eka evāgra āsín nānyat kiṃcana miṣat | sa īkṣata | lokān nu sṛjā iti ||). Eventually the deities were created, and they fell into a “vast ocean.” He became hungry and thirsty. The gods demanded a dwelling in which they could “establish” themselves “and eat food” (āyatanaṃ naḥ prajānīhi yasmin pratiṣṭhitā annam adāma, 1.1.2). First, a cow was brought; then, a horse. Both turned out to be inadequate; he wanted a man, and the man turned out to be well-made (sukṛtam). “Then he [the ātman] told them: ‘Enter, each into your respective dwelling’ (tā abravīd yathāyatanaṃ praviśata, 1.1.4) So, the fire became speech and entered the mouth (agnir vāg bhūtvā mukhaṃ prāviśat); the wind became breath and entered the nostrils (prāṇo bhūtvā nāsike prāviśat); the sun became sight and entered the eyes (ādityaś cakṣur bhūtvākṣiṇī prāviśat); the quarters became hearing and entered the ears (diśaḥ śrotraṃ bhūtvā karṇau prāviśat); the plants and trees became body hairs and entered the skin (oṣadhivanaspatayo lomāni bhūtvā tvacaṃ prāviśan); the moon became mind and entered the heart (candramā mano bhūtvā hṛdayaṃ prāviśat); death became the in-breath and entered the navel (mṛtyur apāno bhūtvā nābhiṃ prāviśat); the waters became semen and entered the penis (āpo reto bhūtvā śiśnaṃ prāviśan)” “Then he thought to himself: ‘How can this possibly carry on without me?’ And he thought: ‘Through which of these shall I enter?’” (sa īkṣata katareṇa prapadyā iti, 1.3.11–12).72 The ātman considered entering though speech, prāṇa, the eyes, the ears, the skin, the mind, the apāna, and the penis. Finally he decided to “split open the head at the point where the hairs part and entered through that gate” (sa etam eva sīmānaṃ vidāryaitayā dvārā prāpadyata, 1.3.12).73

The ŚvetU continues that the great deity abides unseen within all beings and all things. A natural separation between the puruṣa and the world appears to be established as a doctrinal point, at least until that separation is closed due to an act of will of the deity or the brahman to close it.

ŚvetU 6.11–12:	eko devaḥ sarvavhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ sarvavyāpī sarvabhūtāntarātmā | karmādhyakṣaḥ sarvabhūtādhivāsaḥ sākṣī cetā kevalo nirguṇaś ca || eko vaśī niṣkriyāṇāṃ bahūnām ekaṃ bījaṃ bahudhā yaḥ karoti | tam ātmasthaṃ ye ’nupaśyanti dhīrās teṣāṃ sukhaṃ śāśvataṃ netareṣām ||

The one God hidden in all beings, all-pervading, the inner self of all beings, the overseer of action, dwelling in all beings, the witness, the spectator, alone, devoid of qualities, the one controller of the many who are inactive, who makes the single seed manifold—the wise who perceive him as abiding within themselves [ātman], they alone, not others, enjoy eternal happiness.74

The fifth chapter of the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (KU) shows, once again, that the Upaniṣadic thinkers regarded the body as an inert entity until it was animated by an unattached life substance. KU 5.4 states: “When this embodied self dwelling in the body comes unglued and is freed from the body—what then is here left behind?”75 This is reminiscent of Kauṣītaki Upaniṣad (KṣU) 1.2, in which the seasons send a dead man into the semen of another man, who is an agent through which the dead man is poured into a mother: “Then you sent me into a man, the agent; and, through that man as the agent, you poured me into a mother” (tasmā pusi kartary erayadhvaṃ pusā kartrā mātari māsiṣikta |).76 The transfer of a discarnate spirit essence (see below on “transfer of essence”) from one enveloping agent or substance to another further confirms the doctrinal point of inherent separation of essence, “coded substance,” or “spirit,” and physical or observable matter. KU 5.7 suggests reasons that why this living essence occupies a certain body. “Some embodied beings proceed [prapadyante] to a womb for the sake of a body, others move toward immovable objects—according to their actions, according to their learning.” Then Yama, the narrator of the Upaniṣad, describes the integrated action of fire (agni), inner self (antarātman), and lifebreath (vāyu) adapting to its selected body.

KU 5.9–10:	agnir yathaiko bhuvanaṃ praviṣṭo rūpaṃrūpaṃ pratirūpo babhūva | ekas tathā sarvabhūtāntarātmā rūpaṃrūpaṃ pratirūpo bahiś ca || vāyur yathaiko bhuvanaṃ praviṣṭo rūpaṃrūpaṃ pratirūpo babhūva | ekas tathā sarvabhūtāntarātmā rūpaṃrūpaṃ pratirūpo bahiś ca ||

As the one fire, entering the world, takes on an appearance corresponding to each form, so the one self within all beings takes on forms corresponding to each form, yet remains outside them. As the one wind, entering the world, takes on forms corresponding to each form, so the one self within all beings takes on forms corresponding to each form, yet remains outside them.77

The sixth question of the Praśna Upaniṣad (PU) poses the question: “Do you, O Bhāradvāja, know the person consisting of sixteen parts? … Who is that person?” (ṣoḍaśakalaṃ bhāradvāja puruṣaṃ vettha … kvāsau puruṣa iti). The sage Pippalāda instructs the pupil Sukeśa in the complex nature of the individual:

PU 6.2, 5:	ihaivāntaḥ śarīre somya sa puruṣo yasminn etāḥ ṣoḍaśakalāḥ prabhavantīti || … sa yathemā nadyaḥ syandāyaṇān samudraṃ prāpyās taṃ gacchanti | bhidyete tāsāṃ nāmarūpe | samudra ity evaṃ procyate | evam evāsya paridraṣṭur imāḥ ṣoḍaśa kalān puruṣāyaṇāḥ puruṣaṃ prāpyās taṃ gachanti | bhidyete cāsāṃ nāmarūpe | puruṣa ity evaṃ procyate | sa eṣo ’kalo ’mṛto bhavati |

Right here within the body, my friend, is that person in whom the sixteen parts come into being.… Now, take these rivers. They flow toward the ocean and, upon reaching it, merge into the ocean and lose their name and visible appearance; one simply calls it the ocean. In just the same way, these sixteen parts of the person who is the perceiver proceed toward the person and, upon reaching him, merge into that person, losing their names and visible appearances; one simply calls it the person. He then becomes partless and immortal.78

Just as brahman entered the world and disappeared within it, and as the rivers enter and become indistinguishable from the ocean, so the cosmic puruṣa enters and dissolves within the individual person (puruṣa).

If the individual fails to take advantage of this ultimately divine embodiment by slipping into ignorance and pride—which the Upaniṣad regards as misuse of sacred knowledge for the sake of worldly delight, or learning for its own sake—the consequence, described in the Īśā Upaniṣad, is another sort of possession.

ĪU 9:	andhaṃ tamaḥ praviśanti ye ’vidyām upāsate | tato bhūya iva te tamo ya u vidyāyā ratāḥ ||

Into blind darkness they enter, people who worship ignorance; And into still blinder darkness, people who delight in learning.79

ĪU 12:	andhaṃ tamaḥ praviśanti ye ’saṃbhūtim upāsate | tato bhūya iva te tamo ya u saṃbhūtyā ratāḥ ||

Into blind darkness they enter, people who worship nonbecoming; And still blinder darkness, people who delight in becoming.80

The ignorant and the arrogant become immersed in, possessed by, thick layers of darkness (tamas). The individual should, after all, be able to recognize the divine source that has entered and possessed the world and all embodied beings. Through well-directed meditative practice, the individual should be able to reverse the direction of this possession and meet this divinity within his or her own heart.

KU 4.6,7:	yaḥ pūrvaṃ tapaso jātam adbhyaḥ pūrvam ajāyata | guhāṃ praviśya tiṣṭhantaṃ yo bhūtebhir vyapaśyata || etad vai tat ||6|| yā prāṇena saṃbhavati aditir devatāmayī | guhāṃ praviśya tiṣṭhantaṃ yo bhūtebhir vyapaśyata || etad vai tat ||7||

He who was born before heat, who before the waters was born, who has seen through living beings—Entering the cave of the heart, [one sees] him abiding there. So, indeed, is that. She who comes into being with breath, Aditi, who embodies divinity, who was born through living beings—Entering the cave of the heart, [one sees] him abiding there. So, indeed, is that.81

The KṣU describe more landscape on the path to the gods.

KṣU 1.5:	sa āgacchatīlyaṃ vṛkṣam | taṃ brahmagandhaḥ praviśati | sa āgacchati sālajyaṃ saṃsthanam | taṃ brahmarasaḥ praviśati | sa āgacchaty aparājitam āyatanam | taṃ brahmatejaḥ praviśati | sa āgacchatīndraprājapatī dvāragopau | tāv asmād apadravataḥ | sa āgacchati vibhu pramitam | taṃ brahmayaśaḥ praviśati ||

He arrives at the tree Ilya, and the fragrance of brahman permeates him. Then he arrives at the plaza Sālajya, and the flavor of brahman permeates him. Then he arrives at the palace Aparājita, and the radiance of brahman permeates him. Then he arrives near the doorkeepers, Indra and Prajāpati, and they flee from him. Then he arrives at the hall Vibhu, and the glory of brahman permeates him.82

He is entered, permeated by fragrance, flavor, radiance, glory. The passage continues to describe the throne of brahman, identified as wisdom (prajñā), constituted of sāmans. On it is a couch constituted in various places by the past and present, praṇa, prosperity and nourishment, different sāmans, ṛg verses, Yajus mantras, and soma stalks. Brahman sits on this couch. But brahman cannot be permeated, entered, occupied, or possessed by anything or anybody. With its various manifestations it can, however, enter, occupy, and permeate an individual, dead or alive. The text continues to describe his return journey to brahman and his realization of it.

It is important to note in the Upaniṣads the use of pra√viś rather than ā√viś, which was used in contexts of possession almost exclusively in the ṚV. The idiomatic distinction that has prevailed throughout most of the history of Sanskrit and Indic literature has, thus, already been established by the time of the Upaniṣads: pra√viś is used for entry in which the intentionality of entering, pervading, permeating, or possessing originates from without, from an external agent. In contrast, ā√viś is established in cases in which the intentionality is from within; an individual invites entry, pervasion, possession by soma. In these usages, praveśa serves (in general) practical, creative ends, while āveśa more often than not describes ecstatic (and, later, oracular) possession.
