+++
title = "05 Transfer of Essence"

+++
Related to possession and sometimes nearly indistinguishable from it, as we have seen in reviewing vedic passages on speech (vc) and sustenance (rjam), is a notion developed with considerable sophistication in the middle vedic texts and Upaniṣads. This notion may be labeled “transfer of essence.” This topic is vast and fraught with pitfalls, including proximity to early notions of karma (the pervading influence of the moral quality of one’s action on the individual as a whole),83 its overlap with the often-discussed epistemological strategy called bandhu or bandhuta, linkage of one phenomenon, entity, being, notion, or concept with another, based on phonological similarities, numerological equivalences, or other formal principles,84 and the subsequent invitation into the minefield of transactional models for human (and nonhuman) action. We can barely pause to deal with the first and second of these, but will gradually unfold the third, for which McKim Marriott and Stephanie Jamison have worked out effective models, albeit separately: Jamison did not consult Marriott’s work in constructing her transactional model of vedic sacrificial ritual in her book Sacrificed Wife/Sacrificer’s Wife.

These essences, akin to Marriott’s coded substances, are transferred in much the same way an integrated personality with a complex identity passes into another during a conscious or otherwise felt experience of possession: as unseen though hardly undetected or unexplained forces, substances, or entities moving from one bounded corporeality to another, from one individual to another, or from a deity or other ethereal being into a human vessel. If “essences” are to be discussed, it would be wise to locate Sanskrit equivalents. Perhaps the primary word for “essence” used in the Sanskrit lexicon is rasa. It is employed in this general sense in the Brāhmaṇas to indicate a life-force or life-essence that may be transferred from one being or state to another.85 For example, the ŚB 6.1.1.4,7 speaks of rasa as the medium through which puruṣa, the archetypal person, became Prajāpati, the Lord of Created Beings, and was henceforth identified with Agni in the esoteric doctrine of the agnicayana.86 In BĀU 1.2.2, heat (tejas) is identified as the essence of Death (mṛtyu), who, in his role as creator, became Agni (tejo raso niravartāgniḥ). However, the appearance in a text passage of the word rasa (or any other singularly identified word) is by no means requisite to illustrate that “essences” are transferable.

Two general differences between transfer of essence and possession may be noted. First, in “transfer of essence,” the substances transferred are elemental and constitutive, such as sexuality, life-force (prāṇá), disease, sacrificial essence (médhas), bráhman-splendor (brahmavarcasá), and the taint of transgression (énas). Except for prāṇá in certain texts, these substances do not themselves indicate or include within them whole and integrated personalities. Second, transfer of essence is not driven by independent intentionality, but is guided externally. Intent, the psychomental vehicle accommodating the essence to be transferred flows from a conscious bearer to an (often unsuspecting) individual or locus in or on which it eventually subsists. Most often in the vedic theological texts transfer of essence is explained as either an artifact of an original and paradigmatic act of creation—it was obvious, after all, that offspring were somehow defined by the essences (semen and blood) transferred from their progenitors—or, doubtless based on this and other observable patterns in nature, part of a chain of ritual transactions that centrally invoked coded substances.87 In this way the transfer of essences was naturalized; and this, it appears, in no small measure contributed to the naturalization and widespread assumption of possession in South Asia.

The Atharvaveda contains a rather long hymn (thirty-four verses, AVĀ 11.8, AVP 11.10) that describes the “putting-together” (saṃdh) of the human body, explained by Sāyaṇa as the manner in which bráhman entered the body with its own essence (śarīrasya madhye ātmatvena praviṣṭaṃ brahma). After noting that bráhman’s creative powers were gathered from the opposite energetic poles of personal austerities (tápas) and ritual action (kárman), the sage states that the body’s intentionality (kuti) consists of inhalation and exhalation (prāṇāpānáu), sight (cákṣus), hearing (śrótram), wholeness (ákṣitiḥ), fissure (kṣítiḥ), the breath disseminated throughout the body and the upward-moving breath (vyānodānáu), speech (vk), and mind (mánas) (11.8.4). At this point it appears that the divinities Indra, Soma, Agni, Tvaṣṭṛ, and Dhātṛ stepped in to assist bráhman. The work of primary creation became corporate as corporeality increased in complexity. The poet then asks what realm (lokám) bráhman entered (prviśan) after he brought into being (bharat) hair, bone, sinew, flesh, marrow, and created a body with feet (11.8.11). The answer appears to be that this loká is a person whom the gods then possessed (púruṣam viśan), a whole mortal (sárvaṃ mártyaṃ), poured together by the gods (11.8.13). The gods possessed this person (púruṣam viśan) after Tvaṣṭṛ made this mortal into a house (11.8.18). The realm bráhman and the gods entered is expressed with pra√viś, but the act of entering into and enlivening the whole person is expressed with ā√viś.

The next nine verses list various essences that then entered into this body:

AVĀ 11.8.19–27:	svápno vái tandrr nírṛtiḥ pāpmno nma devátāḥ | jar khlatyaṃ plityaṃ śárīram ánu prviśan |19|| stéyaṃ duṣkṛtáṃ vṛjináṃ satyáṃ yajñó yáśo bṛhát | bálaṃ ca kṣatrám ójaó ca śárīram ánu prviśan ||20|| bhtiś ca v ábhūtiś ca rātáyó ’tayaś ca yḥ | kṣúdhaś ca sárvās tṣṇāś ca śárīram ánu prviśan ||21|| nidrś ca v ánidrāś ca yác ca hántéti néti ca | śárīram śraddhdákṣiṇśraddhā cnu prviśan ||22|| vidyś ca v ávidyāś ca yáccānyd upadeśyám | śárīram bráhma prviśad caḥ smtho yájuḥ ||23|| ānand módḥ pramúdo ’bhīmodamúdaś ca yé | hasó narīṣṭā nṛttni śárīram ánu prviśan ||24|| ālāpś ca pralāpś cābhīlāpalápaś ca yé | śárīram sárve prviśann āyújaḥ prayújo yújaḥ ||25|| prāṇāpānáu cákṣuḥ śrótram ákṣitiś ca kṣītiś ca y | vyānodānáu vṇ mánaḥ śárīreṇa tá īyante ||26|| āśīṣaś ca praśīṣaś ca saṃśīṣo viśīṣaś ca yḥ | cittni sárve saṃkalpḥ śárīram ánu prviśan ||27||

Sleep, weariness, chaos, the deities named evils, old age, baldness, hoariness, entere A the body afterward (19). Theft, bad action, wrong, truth, sacrifice, great glory, strength and dominion, as well as force, entered the body afterward (20). Both growth and diminution, generosity and stinginess, both hungerings and all thirstings, entered the body afterward (21). Sleep and waking, that which [says] “indeed” and “no,” trust, the sacrificial fee, and distrust, entered the body afterward (22). Knowledge and ignorance, and that which is otherwise to be taught, the bráhman entered the body, the mantras from the Ṛgveda, the chants of the Sāmaveda, and the recitations from the Yajurveda (23). Delights, joys, enjoyments, and those who enjoy enjoyments, laughter, leisure, and dances, entered the body afterward (24). Conversation, idle chatter, and those who utter declarations, all entered the body, whether they come already united [in their declarations], will unite with them forthwith, or are in the process of uniting with them (25). Inhalation and exhalation, sight, hearing, wholeness, fissure, the disseminated breath and the upward-moving breath, speech, and mind, all wander about with this body (26). Blessings and precepts, demands and explanations, thoughts, all intentions, entered the body afterward (27).88

This extraordinary and perhaps unlikely list includes moods, states of mind, intentional states, ethical choices, types of action, bodily functions, modes of breath, and, importantly for the Vedas, modes of speech. All of these may be classified as substance-codes, as essences that enter from without but are constitutive of the vedic person.

Verse 28 is very obscure, but appears to suggest that there are certain essences, not clearly delineated, that are rejected from the human persona and “caused to settle in the repugnant one” (bibhatsvasādayan), perhaps a reference to demonic beings. The doctrine of the construction of the body is completed in the next verse:

AVĀ 11.8.30:	y po yś ca devátā y virḍ bráhmaṇā sahá | śárīraṃ bráhma pr viśac chárīré ’dhi prajpatiḥ ||

Those which are the waters, which are the deities, which is virj, [have come] with bráhman. Brahmān has entered the body. Prajāpati is in the body.

Several passages from the Brāhmaṇa texts report that the médhas (nourishment or sacrificial essence),89 of the five paradigmatic sacrificial victims—man, horse, bull, goat, and sheep—were successively lost and subsequently transferred to the next in order after they were sacrificed by the gods. After the gods offered up a man (puruṣa) as a victim, his medhas entered (praviveśa) the horse, and so on down the line until finally it entered the earth and was recovered in the form of rice and barley.90 The loss of this essence rendered the victims unsuitable for sacrifice, while dramatically increasing the sacrificial potency of rice and barley products.91 What distinguishes this from possession is its abstract theoretical nature. The transfer of medhas is a device employed by the authors of the Brāhmaṇa texts to account for the supremacy of vegetal offerings;92 though “real,” it is not conceived as immediately experiential, at least not in a self-reflective or compelling sense. The knower of the Veda is expected to grasp the significance of this transfer of essence through symbolic codes rather than to experience it through the senses. Nevertheless, this demonstrates, first, that essence, hence identity, was not regarded as necessarily fixed or stable and, second, that the instability could be both encoded and codified. For states of possession, to which transfer of essence is closely related, this signified that being “out of control” while remaining within the boundaries of sanctioned behavioral parameters was tantamount to surrendering to a natural order or a phenomenon that could be safely predicted: for what is encoded may be predicted, what is predictable can be naturalized, what is naturalized can be codified, and what is codified can be roped into a realm of safety. In other words, the very fact of bringing an inherently untraceable and unstable force, medhas, under the control of an order conceived of as natural had implications for other similar forces: namely that their natural power could also be attenuated, channeled deliberately, and domesticated.

A distinct case of transfer of essence appears in Book 6 of the ChU In this important account, backgrounded in the BĀU (1.4.7), creation of the material world is linked to animation of inert beings. Śvetaketu, the son of Āruṇi, returns home after twelve years of Veda study, arrogant in his learning. There is still much for him to learn, his father tells him. After determining that in the beginning was existence (sat) rather than nonexistence (asat), Āruṇi teaches Āvetaketu that the first individuated properties of this conscious but neuter existence were tejas (the active, creative light arising from fire), apas (water in its creative form of nourishing rain), and annam (food, the nourishing, sustaining, active wealth of the earth). From the least substantial and solid to the most, tejas emitted (asṛjata) apas and apas emitted annum. This potent stew gave rise to a diversity of creatures, which in turn were individuated with name and form. It was only after this moment of individuation that personhood (ātman) was conferred. This process did not transpire through the inevitability of sat, but was galvanized by an unnamed creator deity (seyaṃ devatā) who established distinctions of name and form by entering (anupraviśya) the various beings in the form of ātman.93 BAU 1.4.7 says that “he penetrated this body up to the tips of the nails” (sa eṣa iha praviṣṭa ā nakhāgrebhyaḥ).

People do not see him, for he is incomplete as he comes to be called breath when he is breathing, speech when he is speaking, sight when he is seeing, hearing when he is hearing, and mind when he is thinking. These are only the names of his various activities. A man who considers him to be any one of these does not understand him, for he is incomplete within any one of these. One should consider them as simply his person [ātman], for in it all these become one.94

Just as matter is divided into discrete units, given name and form, then conferred individuality and personhood as a complex but centrally adherent whole, the essence or essences of this person can be transferred to another. The Upaniṣads provide an example of this in a rite called saṃpratti or saṃpradāna (transmission), related in BĀU (1.5.17) and KṣU(2.14).95 The BĀU description (1.5.14–20) opens the discussion with the familiar assertion that Prajāpati, like the year, consists of sixteen parts. “With that sixteenth part he enters [anupraviśya], on the night of the new moon, all beings that sustain life and is born again the next morning.” The sixteenth part is the supernumerary unseen essence, beyond the fifteen divisions of the fortnight, half the lunar month that constitutes the basic vedic calendrical unit. This sixteenth part, the unseen essence, enters and pervades all beings. The Upaniṣad continues, “A man’s fifteen parts comprise his wealth, his sixteenth part is his person [ātman].”96

Immediately before his expected death, a man performs a rite of transfer of his essence to his son. “You are the brahman! You are the sacrifice! You are the world!” he tells his son. “I am the brahman! I am the sacrifice! I am the world!” replies his son. Thus, “he enters [āviśati] his son with these very vital functions [prāṇaiḥ saha]. So it is only through a son that a man finds a secure footing in this world. Thereupon, these [following] divine and immortal vital functions enter [āviśnnti] him. From the earth and fire divine speech enters [āviśati] him. Divine speech is that which makes whatever one says happen. From the sky and the sun the divine mind enters [āviśati] him. The divine mind is that which makes a person always happy and never sorrowful. From the waters and the moon the divine breath enters [āviśati] him. The divine breath is that which never falters or fails, whether it is moving or at rest.”97 The son thus is conferred the gifts of true speech, happiness, and unhindered, balanced breath.

KṣU 2.15, a slightly later text,98 is more detailed: The father lies down dressed in a fresh garment, with ritual fire kindled and a pot of water near at hand. The son lies down on top of the father, touching his father’s body parts with his own corresponding parts; otherwise, they sit facing each other.99 Not only is the lifebreath transferred but, in a similar formulaic rhythm of announcement and response, so are speech, sight, hearing, taste, actions, pleasures and pains, bliss, delight, and procreative capacity, movements, mind, and intelligence. If the father is too unwell to speak much, he may limit the transfer to the praṇas alone. The son then turns around toward his right, walks toward the east, and his father wishes him well: “May glory, the luster of sacred knowledge, and fame attend you!” (taṃ pitānumantrayate yaśo brahmavarcasaṃ kīrtis tvā juṣatām iti). The son glances over his left shoulder, hiding his face with his hand or the hem of his garment, and replies, “May you gain heavenly worlds and realize your desires!” (svargāl lokān kāmān āpnuhīti). Interestingly, the KṣU ends its account with the statement: “If the father recovers his health, he should either live under the authority of his son or live as a wandering ascetic. But if he happens to die, they should perform the appropriate final rites for him.”100

If he recovers, the father must submit to the son’s authority not only because his essence as lifebreath and other mental and physical functions have been transferred, which is to say he has become ritually lifeless, but because his essence as power has also been transferred, which is to say he has become ritually powerless. Olivelle contends that “the rite transfers the father’s position as paterfamilias to his son.” This, says Olivelle, “must have also involved handing over the paternal estate,” a transfer of rather more material essences. Thus “the transfer is irrevocable,” leaving only these two options.101 Essence, then, is not inexhaustible; when transferred it is gone from its source. Like possession, essence is transferred rather than spread or extended, and here the Upaniṣads are unmistakably describing a rite in which the father, ritually at least, possesses the son. Unlike most classical possession, however, it cannot be reversed, in this case readmitted into the person of the father.102 In Vedic and Upaniṣadic fashion, it is a complex and piecemeal possession.103

The difference in complexity between the BĀU and the KṣU accounts is important. Why did the BĀU ritualists regard the prāṇas as the sole repositories of essence that required transfer, and why did the KṣU require a good deal more to be transferred in order to successfully complete the job? The easy answer would be that the BĀU is a text of the Śuklayajurveda, known for its relatively simple ritual, at least compared to that of the various branches (śākhās) of the Kṛṣṇayajurveda and the ṚV, to which the KṣU belongs.104 Beyond this, however, may be the idea that the “self” or “person” to be transferred was considered by different theoreticians of ritual exactitude to possess different degrees of complexity. In addition, the complexity exhibited in the KṣU might reflect the developing tendency in Indian systematic (śāstraic) thought to provide cleaner, more detailed lists. The most convenient example of this in philosophical thinking is Sāṃkhya, with its lists of embryological principles (tattvas), which may be indebted, at least in part, to thinkers of the Kauṣītaki or Śāṇkhāyana ritual school. It is also possible that the “self” or “person” was analyzed as incomplete without more body parts and functions.105 In this case, the movements, procreative capacity, intelligence, and so on of the father would be regarded as equal in importance to the prāṇas, but would not be regarded as subservient to them or as “naturally” carried along with them. The naming of body parts, including sense organs, as epistemological units and assigning them extrasensory coordinates is not inconsistent with theories of association invoked previously in the Brāhmaṇas.106 In turn, this more complex view might reflect a greater concern with fragmentation and randomness after death, which could account for a more complex and integrated transfer of essences.107

Probably the best-known example of transfer of essence appears in the TS (2.5.1). In one of the more famous (and infamous) of vedic tales, Indra killed Viśvarūpa, the brahman son of Tvaṣṭṛ, thus incurring “brahman-murder” (brahmahaty), even then one of the most feared transgressions. The name Viśvarūpa indicates an omniform being, in this case a deity. He possessed three heads: One drank soma, another surā, while the third ate food. Indra chopped off these heads with his thunderbolt (vajra) because he saw Viśvarūpa as a threat to his sovereignty. Indra, however, did not live long with this stain; rather, he managed to transfer it to others. One-third of it was transferred to the earth, whose surface is breached through digging; one-third to trees, whose branches are pruned; and the final third was allocated to women, whose bodies leak through menstrual periods (malavadvāsas [stained garments]).108 These three were not left defenseless, however. In return for accepting the brahmahaty, the earth extracted from Indra the promise that each year her rifts would heal, the trees extracted the guarantee that more shoots would spring up to replace the cut branches, and women were given the boon of childbirth and enjoying intercourse at will up to the time of delivery (which is to say that during this time she is not subject to exclusion because of her menses).

This story did not exist in isolation. Indeed, the notion of scapegoating is familiar from the AV and other Brāhmaṇa texts. The usual locution is that the énas, generally an archetypal or “original sin” because it was perpetrated by a god, is “wiped off” (√mṛj, e.g., Maitrāyaṇi Saṃhitā [MS] 4.1.9: mārkṣyāmahe) on others who are weakened or victimized by nature (as in the case of the earth, trees, or women) or have opposed the dictates of social order and ethics.109 For example, MS 4.1.9 lists the eventual recipients of the gods’ transgression (énas) in accepting the sacrifice of animals. These include gods known only by number—Ekata, Dvita, Trita—who in turn transferred the énas to those who sleep at sunrise or sunset (probably a reference to those who do not perform the daily agnihotra), those with brown teeth or diseased nails (poorly formed or maintained natural excesses that may have indicated a more serious ontological or social problem), murderers, abortionists, both brothers if the younger married before his elder brother, or a man who married a younger sister before the older one had married. AV 6.113, 114 describe the reallocation of disease believed to be produced by an invasive spirit (grhi) to many of these same victims as well as onto the foam of a river. According to the Kauśikasūtra (46.26–29) on these hymns, the énas disappears with the vanishing of the foam.110

Several brāhmaṇa passages explored by Stephanie Jamison relate the myth of Manu’s cups, a fascinating, if highly compressed, tale of hospitality and transfer of essence.111 A composite distillation, drawn primarily from MS 4.8 and Kāṭhaka Saṃhitā (KS) 30.1, both frustratingly fragmentary, may be presented as follows: Manu had some asura-killing cups, which the asuras, naturally, wished to destroy. Disguising themselves as brahmans, they beg the cups from Manu and destroy them. The broken vessels are then licked by one of Manu’s bulls, which causes it to take on the asura-killing essence. Two brahmans, again asuras in disguise, appear at Manu’s doorstep and benevolently volunteer to sacrifice a bull for him. Unable to refuse the solicitation of brahmans, Manu acquiesces. The bull is sacrificed; but its unoffered haunch is stolen by an eagle, which drops it into the lap of Manu’s wife. Thus she ends up taking on the asura-killing essence. Itinerant priests (prātaritvan) then show up and importune Manu to sacrifice his wife. This he very nearly does when, bound to the stake, Manu’s wife is set free.

This should be examined in greater detail. The MS (4.8.1) states that “Meni came after/entered” (ánvapadyata) the bull to be offered in sacrifice. After the bull was offered, “Meni” entered Manu’s wife. Meni, Jamison demonstrates at length, is “the power or embodiment of negative or thwarted exchange.”112 The complementary passage in the KS (30.1) says, “The two (Asurās) approached [Manu and his wife] [as] Prātaritvans” (prātaritvānā abhiprāpadyetām).113 “Then his wife approached, speaking a yajus. Her voice went to heaven.”114 The two asuric brahmans of this passage, Jamison contends, represent “the wicked mirror image of the Aśvins,”115 who are the archetypal healers and allies of Indra. The verbs employed here are anu√pad (follow, attend, enter upon) and abhi-pra√pad(to come toward, enter into).116 In spite of the neutrality of these verbs in Sanskrit literature, they appear here as equivalent to pra√viś or anu-pra√viś, which, as we have seen, are frequently used to indicate externally induced and uninvited possession. Such possession is, predictably, often charged with a negative, dangerous, or foreboding tone.117 In addition to the accounts in the MS and KS, this story is told in the somewhat later ŚB (1.1.4.14–17), which employs the verb pra√viś rather than anu√pad: “Manu had a bull. In it an Asura-killing, rival-killing voice entered” (tásminn asuraghnī vāk práviṣṭāsa). Because the asuras regarded the bull as evil, they decided to have it sacrificed by their two officiants, Kilāta and Ākuli. As a result of this sacrifice, the voice departed, but quickly “entered Mānavī, the wife of Manu” (smánor evá jāyṃ mānavm prāviveśa). This shook the asuras, because that voice combined with Mānavī’s human voice was even more frightening. So they sought permission from Manu to sacrifice his wife. He assented. On her being sacrificed that voice left her118 and “entered the sacrifice itself, the sacrificial vessels” (s yajñam evá yajñaptrāṇi prāviveśa).119 From these loci, the two priests of the asuras were unable to expel it. In sum, the voice (once again a form of vāc)—and along with it the asura-killing mantras it verbalized—was transferred from either the asura-killing cups to the bull (and finally its stolen and unoffered haunch, which fell into Manu’s wife’s lap) to Manu’s wife (MS, KS), or from the bull to Manu’s wife to the sacrifice and the sacrificial vessels (ŚB). Jamison comments, “The demon-killing voice, that undestroyable force, exchanges its way through various items, the cups and the bull, until it lodges in the wife, who is then bound up as real sacrificial victim.”120 Similarly, Meni, the power of thwarted exchange, was transferred from the bull to Manu’s wife, which, it seems, forced her voice to leave her and ascend to heaven.

Whatever else of interest may be seen in this brief story (and Jamison unpacks it over about two hundred pages), the main points for the present purpose are (a) that both meni and the asura-killing are substances of a sort that are transferrable, and (b) that the transfer of essence occurred forcibly from without, exclusive of the will of the possessed. This may be viewed as an example of “natural circulation” in the Vedas, circulation, to be sure, of coded substances. As Jamison points out, “in the Vedic conception of both ritual and natural circulation, nothing is lost: it is simply transformed or displaced.”121 This displacement has implications for possession: the consciousness, spirit, entity, or deity finds a new, if temporary, home.

Jamison’s primary concern is with the presence and fate of the sacrificer’s wife (putnī), whose real purpose in the ritual, she says, is to “trap sexuality and its power for ritual use.”122 Although the woman’s presence is limited, it is sufficient to confer the ritual with sexuality and fertility (two more coded substances), thus helping to fuel its trajectory toward sacral or divine power and energy. Through this contact with sacral forces, Jamison maintains, “the divine is spread back to her, to increase her generative capacity,”123 in much the same way, we might imagine, that the asura-killing voice, her own voice laden with yajus mantras, ascended to heaven and, via a circuitous route, made its way back to her. In this transactional view of the vedic ritual, coded substances are borne from one entity, deity, person, or force to another through a mediating figure. In this and other examples, the wife’s contact with sacral forces produces transactions and reciprocations that are kinetic and multiple. They are occasioned, says Jamison, “through a chain of representational contact.”124 The wife, she asserts, “in some sense embodies exchange relations. She is a mediating figure between different realms, and whenever ancient Indian ritual or mythology requires or depicts the perilous contact between realms, a woman is often the central figure.”125 “She is,” Jamison concludes, “the ultimate exchange token.”126 Jamison notes that, “the frame provided by the wife’s activities stabilizes the ritual, locates it within the ongoing life of the community, and provides a safe transition into and out of the sacred realms.”127 Thus, during the prototypical animal sacrifice (paśubandha) the wife is called on to touch the dead animal. Jamison comments that this

creates the necessary contact between the human and the divine realms, between the living and the dead that is a major aim of the sacrifice. She is the lightning rod for divine power, or, to exchange images, the point of entry, the channel for it. She gains access to powerful and dangerous forces unleashed by the killing and can direct them to her husband and the success of his ritual, without his putting himself at risk.128

Let us now turn to a few texts, more or less at random, that drew directly on vedic precedents, thus illustrating the textual routes by which the notion of transfer of essence entered later popular religious discourse. In a passage with an unimpeachable vedic pedigree—it was obviously the product of brahman theologians who knew vedic ritual firsthand—the Brahmānda Purāṇa (1.2.21.56–57b) speaks of transfer of a different kind of essence. “As the sun sets, the luster of the sun gradually enters [āviśate] the [sacrificial] fire. As a result of this the sun shines from afar at night. When the sun rises again the luster of the fire takes possession of [āviśet] it.”129

While the sun and the sacrificial fire that is forged in the Agnihotra ritual are clearly distinguished, they are connected through a regulated transfer of essence. The continuation of this passage speaks of similar cyclical phenomena flowing into one another and transferring their essence as one wanes and the other waxes, including day and night, north and south, and the two divisions of the year (uttarāyaṇa and dakṣiṇāyana). However, the verb ā√viś is not employed consistently; it alternates with (anu-)pra√viś, demonstrating, at least in this case, an absence of distinction, and probably an identity, between words that had generally achieved semantic distinction, one meaning “to possess,” the other “to enter.” For example, the AB (8.28) employs the rather more expected anu-pra√viś for the entrance of lightning into rain, rain into the moon, the moon into the sun (on the new moon day), the sun into the fire, and the fire into the gods. Similarly, arriving at a distinction between ā√viś and pra√viś in TB 3.3.1.5 would be risky. This passage states that the prāṇa, emerging from the mouth, becomes the apāna and enters (pravīśya) the body and the food, beautifying the body. The text immediately reiterates the point in an identical passage, replacing pravīśya with āviśáti.130 A case could be made for interpreting praviśya as simply the entrance of the apāna into the body and the food, while āviśati would indicate the transformative power of the apāna, but this interpretation is not supported by evidence from parallel texts. Subtle variants such as this occur throughout the middle and late vedic literature.131

In another passage with an honorable vedic pedigree, the MBh relates the story of Indra slaying the dragon Vṛtra. In the MBh (3.98–99, crit. ed.), however, Indra does not perform this momentous deed alone (cf. ṚV 1.32); he is assisted by the other gods. Tvaṣṭṛ fashions a vajra from the bones of the faultlessly unselfish sage Dadhīca. It is this vajra, invested with the power of the sage, which Indra himself invested (vyadadhāt)132 with the energy (tejas) of Viṣṇu and the other gods, then uses to slay the dragon and release the creative forces of the cosmic waters.

The much later Bhāgavata Purāṇa (BhP), though not a vedic text in any strict sense,133 contains an interesting passage familiar to vedic sacrificial ritual, in which the ritual fires are “made to ascend” (samāropaṇa) the body of a qualified vedic ritualist or his fire-churning equipment.134 This brief rite is performed before traveling in order to ensure the safe passage of the sacred fire within an environment made ritually sacrosanct, because it is very difficult to transport actual fire. After the rite of samāropaṇa is performed, the body of the sacrificer or his churning equipment manifests (at least ritually) the essence of the sacrificial fire. Thus they must be treated with the same attention to maintenance of purity as the fire itself. The BhP, addressing certain unusual circumstances, transforms this practice into a devotional exercise directed toward Kṛṣṇa. The text says, “having consigned the fires [samāropya] into himself, with his mind fixed on me, he enters [samāviśet] the fire” (BhP 11.18.11cd).135 This is a prescription for ritual suicide, intended for an aged and infirm ritualist who is too weak to observe his vows. Two verses later, Kṛṣṇa gives instructions on how a sacrificer should renounce the practice of vedic ritual and become a wandering mendicant. He should make propitiatory offerings to Kṛṣṇa, give all his belongings to his attendant priests, and consign the fires to his own breaths (agnīn svaprãṇa āveśya, 11.18.13c). Finally he should take the vows of a mendicant (parivrajet). Thus the BhP identifies samāropaṇa (ritual consignment of the fires into oneself or one’s breath) as āveśa (pervasion, immersion, or possession). Āveśya in BhP 11.18.13c appears to equal samāropya in 11.18.11c and is distinct from the complete immersion (samāviśet) into the fires, the act of suicide, spoken of in 11.18.11d.

Conceptually related to this is the story of Varāha, the incarnation of Viṣṇu in the form of a boar, as related in the Kāḷikā Purāṇa (KāP 30–31).136 In this version of the myth, Varāha, having sired three frolicking young boars with his consort, the earth transfigured into a sow, wreaked havoc upon the earth with his wild gyrations. Thus Viṣṇu himself, fully incarnated as Varāha, was so overcome with lust for his wife and love for his children that he lost his sense of his true identity as the preserver of the universe. Not only did he lose his identity, however, but fully expansive and infinite, and containing within himself the Vedas and the ṛṣis, Viṣṇu lost control of his own incarnation. It was left to Śiva to see that Varāha give up his boar’s body in order to reunite with Viṣṇu. Thus Śiva assumed the form of a śarabha, a terrifying eight-legged beast of monumental proportions. After a prolonged battle, Varāha and his boar offspring (“piglets” is not quite right) found themselves in a bad defensive position and were nearly forced to surrender. Short of that, however, like warriors on the defensive everywhere, he opted to negotiate with the enemy. In his negotiations for a lasting peace Varāha found he had an ally: Viṣṇu, suddenly distinct from his own incarnation, appeared at the bargaining table. And it was Viṣṇu who eventually offered to surrender. As he opened his mouth to beg Śiva’s pardon, Varāha saw within it Narasiṃha, the man-lion, another incarnation of Viṣṇu. Varāha then took hold of the energy of Narasiṃha, equal in substance and essence to his own, and made it enter (praviveśa, KāP 30.88) into Viṣṇu, thus re-energizing himself for further battle. In the end, however, Śiva, once again in the form of the śarabha, prevailed, and the energy of Varāha, “shining with its garland of flames like ten million suns,”137 entered (viveśa, 30.141) the body of Viṣṇu, who then finished the job of defeating the śarabha by wresting the energy of the three sons of Varāha and making it enter into (praviveśa, 30.144) himself. In this story, Viṣṇu, after losing control of himself in the form of Varāha, had literally to repossess his missing parts in order to prevent the world from descending into complete dissolution.138 He had to transfer his own missing essence back into himself through familiar processes of āveśa and praveśa. This chain of transfer is, by now, familiar from the earlier vedic literature.
