+++
title = "06 The Gandharva, the Apsaras, and the Vedic Body"

+++

If a single “being” or “entity” may be specified in the Vedas as more deeply implicated in possession than any other, it is, with the exception of the human being, the gandharava. A great deal has been written about this mysterious being since A. Kuhn first addressed the subject in 1852.139 Although it is not my job here either to recount the history of scholarship on the subject or to offer my own definitive account, it may be mentioned that most of the research during the first century after Kuhn’s article appeared was dedicated to speculations on the etymology of the word and its cognates in Greek, particularly kentauros (centaur). Early generations of Indologists labored to identify the gandharva as a cloud spirit, the rising sun, Soma, the genius of the moon, the rainbow, a wind-spirit, a horse or ass, or a giant.140 These identifications were set aside, at least as unilateral interpretations, by A. B. Keith and O. H. de A. Wijesekera, who questioned the linguistic connection with Greek and noted both the incomplete vedic and other Indic evidence brought by previous scholars and uncertainty regarding the deep history of the kentauros.141 The most sensible writing on gandharva to date remains that of Wijesekera,142 who sees connections of the gandharva with all the suggested “meanings” at different points, but none, he demonstrates, are valid as exclusive interpretations. As with most important terms, its meaning appears to have shifted slightly from the ṚV to the Upaniṣads and the Pali canon.143

In the ṚV, gandharva is found in an aqueous environment, especially in the company of Varuṇa, the lord of waters. “It is thus as a side-development of the original aqueous notion,” writes Wijesekera, “that we find in the ninth book of the ṚV a distinct connection of the gandharva with Soma.”144 The gandharva protects the dwelling place of Soma Pavamāna (ṚV 9.83.4); it seizes the soma and takes the rasa or essence that abides within it (tám gandharvḥ práty agṛbhṇan tám sóme rásam dadhuḥ, 9.113.3cd). Wijesekera comments that this passage “establishes the gandharva’s power to impart the vital essence to plants,” a rasa that is elsewhere identified with semen in men and animals, as well as with remedial herbs in the AV.145 In one passage the gandharva is explicitly identified with soma:

ṚV 9.86.36:	apṃ gandharváṃ divyáṃ nṛcákṣasaṃ sómaṃ vīśvasya bhúvanasya rājáse ||

May Soma, the divine gandharva of the waters, beholder of men, reign as king of the entire world.

The gandharva is regarded as male, the female counterpart being the apsaras. Gandharvas gained a reputation in the early and middle vedic literature for their amorousness toward women, and vice versa. For example, the Ṛgvedic hymn to the gandharva Vena states:

ṚV 10.123.5:	apsar jārám upasiṣmiyāṇ yóṣā bibharti paramé vyòman | cárat priyásya yóniṣu priyáḥ sáu sdat pakṣé hiraṇyáye sá vénaḥ ||

The apsaras, a young lady gently smiling, supports her lover [jārám] in the highest vault of heaven. The beloved moving in the wombs of the beloved, this Vena sits on his golden wing.

This verse is weighted with sexual and cosmological symbolism, the ecstatic sexual embrace of the gandharva and the apsaras, and the indissoluble connection between the earth and the sky, the waters and the sun. In whatever way Indologists have run wild with verses like these, there can be little doubt that the gandharva is characterized as male with a fondness for females.

The gandharva is also involved in one of the clearest and most complicated transfers of essence. This is demonstrated in the following passage from the Aitareya Brāhmāṇa 1.27 (cf. TS 6.1.6.5, MS 3.7.3):

somo vai rājā gandharveṣv āsīt | taṃ devāś ca ṛṣayaś cābhyadhyāyan katham ayam asmān somo rājā gacched iti | sā vāg abravīt strīkāmā vai gandharvā mayaiva striyā bhūtayā paṇadhvam iti | neti devā abruvan kathaṃ vayaṃ tvad ṛte syāmeti | sābravīt krīṇītaiva yarhi vāva vo mayārtho bhavitā tarhy eva vo ’haṃ punar āgantāsmīti | tatheti | tayā mahānagnyā bhātayā somaṃ rājānam akrīṇaṃs | tām anukṛtim askannāṃ vatsatarīm ājanti somakrayaṇīm | tayā somaṃ rājānaṃ krīṇanti | tām punar niṣkrīṇīyāt | punar hi sā tān āgacchat | tasmād upāṃśu vācā caritavyam | some rājani krīte gandharveṣu hi tarhi vāg bhavati | sāgnāv eva praṇīyamāne punar āgacchati ||

Soma the king was among the gandharvas. The gods and sages meditated on him, “How will King Soma come to us here? Vāc said, “Gandharvas desire women. Negotiate it with me as that woman.” “No,” said the gods, “how can we exist without you?” She said, “Go ahead and make the purchase. When your objectives require me, then indeed I shall come back to you.” “So be it.” With this Great Naked Lady [mahānagnī] they purchased King Soma. To impersonate her they bring forth an undamaged calf to purchase the soma. With her they buy King Soma. He may again purchase her, as she came back to them. Therefore, [the hotṛ] should whisper his mantras on purchasing King Soma, because Vāc is then in fact among the gandharvas. When the fire is carried forward [from the old āhavanīya to the new one in the performance of the soma sacrifice], she returns again (to the gods).146

Once again the gandharva is associated with one of the most prominent of transferable essences, Vāc, Speech, the Great Naked Lady (mahānagnī), the feminine principle underlying the Ṛgvedic universe, stripped bare. As a bargaining chip she moves from the gods to the gandharvas and back again, a migration that is reenacted in the prāyaṇīyeṣṭi, the rite at the commencement of the soma sacrifice. During this sacrifice soma is ritually purchased and the fire is brought from the āhavanīya, the easternmost of the ritualists’ three fires (tretāgni), to the new āhavanīya in the temporary pavilion used for the soma sacrifice.147 After this fire is established, Vāc returns to the hotṛ, the chief officiant of the ṚV, who may again recite his mantras loudly. It may be assumed that at that point Vāc separates from the gandharvas, vitiating their power and contributing to the sacrifice as a realm of safety.148

The ṚV is explicit in referring to the gandharva as the bird that bears vãc: “The bird bears speech with the mind, that the gandharva uttered within the womb” (pataṅgó vcaṃ mánasā bibharti tm gandharvò ’vadad gárbhe antáḥ, 10.177.2). As already seen, the ṚV connects the gandharva with the womb, including the hiraṇyagarbha, responsible for the generation of the world.149 A gandharva can also take possession of a woman on her wedding night. The TS (3.4.8) prescribes that a staff of udumbara wood be placed in the bed between newlyweds, after which gandharvas are invoked for several days to assist in the consummation of the marriage.150 Looking back to the Ṛgvedic marriage hymn (ṚV 10.85), two of the primary vedic agents of possession, Soma and a gandharva, are considered the first owners of the bride, before Agni and the human husband. The hymn states, “Soma possessed [you] first; a gandharva possessed [you] next. Agni was your third husband; your fourth is human born.”151 The verb here is vivide (pf. of √vid [to acquire, gain]), indicating possession in the sense of ownership. From these passages demonstrating the gandharva’s connection with soma and vāc, its capacity to transfer its essence, with embryonic creation, and as a being that attracts women, it is not surprising that it is associated with possession in the Upaniṣads, especially possession of women.

Although our chief concern is the gandharva, the apsaras also possesses. In a hymn devoted to the gandharva, the AV tells of the mind-numbing wives of the gandharvas:

AV 2.2.5:	yḥ klands támiṣīcayo ’kṣákāmā manomúhaḥ | tbhyaḥ gandharvápatnībhyo ’psarābhyo ’karaṃ namaḥ ||

Those who wail, oppressing by darkness, fond of dice, bewildering minds, to these apsarases, the wives of the gandharvas, I have paid homage.

In another passage it implores an apsaras, Indra, Bhaga, and all the distant gods to restore a patient so that he may “be freed from madness” (yathànu-maditó ’sasi, 6.111.4). The TS says that gandharvas and apsarases cause madness.

TS 3.4.8.4:	māndhuká idhmaḥ √ yá únmdayet tásmai hotavyā gandharvāpsaráso v etám únmādayanti yá únmādayati

Wood from a māndhuka tree should be offered for one who suffers from madness, because the gandharvas and apsarases create madness in one who suffers from madness.

The JB mentions a gandharva and an apsaras who work together to produce madness and death in a brahman named Yavakrī (2.269–72). Here and elsewhere, the human is grasped or seized (gṛhīta) by the gandharva.152 By no means, however, is possession by a gandharva always negative or destructive. Indeed, often it can be oracular.

An early example of such “benevolent” oracular possession appears in the BĀU (3.3.1). A certain Bhujyu Lāhyāyani, a rival of Yājñavalkya, sought the advice of Patañcala Kāpya. Upon entering his house, he discovered that the daughter of Patañcala Kāpya was possessed by a gandharva (tasyāsīd duhitā gandharvagṛhītā; note the use of the root √gṛh rather than ā√viś). Bhujyu then asked the grandharva, speaking through the daughter, who he was. The gandharva replied that he was Sudhanvan of the family of Aṅgiras. Bhujyu asked him the whereabouts of the descendants of Parikṣit (kva pārikṣitā abhavan). He then returned to Yājñavalkya and reported the conversation to him. Yājñavalkya accepted the possession without further question and confirmed the answer of the gandharvas in the form of a riddle: “They went where the performers of the aśvamedha go.”153 The Upaniṣad (3.6) explains that gandharvas pervade the sky (antarikṣalokāḥ) and that the worlds of the gandharvas are pervaded by suns (ādityalokāḥ).

The BĀU further (3.7.1) relates that, on another occasion, Uddālaka went to the home of the same brahman, Patañcala Kāpya, at whose house, it seems, Uddālaka and others were studying ritual and Patañcala was possibly the teacher. This time it was Patañcala’s wife who was possessed by a gandharva (tasyāsīd bhāryā gandharvagṛhītā). Through the wife, the gandharva told Uddālaka that he was Kabandha, the son of Atharvan. This gandharva also turned out to be quite learned, knowing the sūtra and the inner self (antaryāmin). The identity of the second gandharva, Kabandha, begs further investigation for his role as possessor. In the Rāmāyaṇa (3.69), Kabandha, an uncommon name or designation, was a rākṣasa whose body was little more than a trunk because his head and legs had been hammered into his body by blows from Indra’s vajra.154

Let us turn for a moment to Śaṅkara commentary on this episode. On BĀU 3.3.1, he states that the possession signifies “some being other than human; or the term [gandharvagṛhītā] may mean fire that is worshipped in the house—the deity who is a priest [to the gods]. We conclude thus from this special knowledge, for an ordinary being cannot possibly have such knowledge.” Śaṅkara is here chary of possession, or at least of spirit possession, and searches for alternative meanings in spite of the clarity of the Sanskrit. This is probably motivated by that very brahmanical priggishness of which Gombrich speaks. However, for whatever it is worth in building historical arguments, it should not be forgotten that one of Śaṅkara’s most famous exploits, given considerable attention in the digvajayas on his life, is his occupation of the body (parakāyapraveśa) of the dead king Amaruka.155 He entered into (pra√viś) this possession in order to experience the joys of sexual love without defiling his own body, a tale recounted at greater length in Chapter 7.156 For the present purposes, it is sufficient to note that he engaged in this possession in order to defeat Ubhayabhāratī, an incarnation of Sarasvatī, the Goddess of Knowledge, who had challenged him to debate the subject of erotics (kāmaśāstra). His method, consistent with the rules of debate, was not madness but control, awareness, and deliberation, congruent with “civilized” goals. Because these are not theorized in the BĀU as aspects of possession—which by Śaṅkara’s time had already a questionable reputation, he decided to present secondary interpretations. In his partial defense, however, the gandharvas in question appear to have exemplified brahmanical propriety in their possession and that Śaṅkara was much later following their examples. These gandharvas were from more or less respectable brahman clans (though ones noted for their knowledge of sympathetic magic), the Aṅgirasas and the Atharvaṇas, and taught, through their possessing agents, respectable brahmanical doctrine.157

We would be remiss if we did not point out that Śaṅkara’s possession is an excellent example of the application of the notions of purity and pollution and offers a lucid commentary on the role of the body in Indian religion, though a body vastly simplified from the one delineated in AVŚ 11.8 described above. Only by successfully meeting the challenge of Ubhayabhāratī could Śaṅkara claim omniscience (sarvajñatā), and his only resort was parakāyapraveśa. By maintaining the celibacy (brahmacarya) of his own body, he was still able to enjoy sexual intercourse.158

Finally, it may not be too far-fetched to link the possession of gandharvas by women in the BĀU with oracular possession, notably of women and children, in later times. I deal with this topic again in Chapter 11, but for the moment we should ask an important question of the BĀU material, namely, what is missing from it? Did Bhujyu Lāhyāyani simply wander into his friend Patañcala Kāpya’s house on a couple of occasions and discover his wife and daughter occupied with housework, possessed by gandharvas, ready to take questions? This is highly unlikely. More likely, given the evidence of later texts, a ritual was taking place and Bhujyu Lāhyāyani showed up for the occasion. Although BĀU 3.7.1 leads us to believe, at first glance, that Patañcala Kāpya was merely studying some form of vedic ritual, the remaining context is one of women’s possession. It is thus not impossible that Patañcala was presiding over a possession ritual, perhaps not radically unlike those textualized from the mid-first millennium C.E. onward. The presence of gandharvas is also highly suggestive. Possession by a gandharva might in fact indicate a context (often, as we have seen, labeled shamanistic, found in cultures throughout the world, including India) in which music was played as part of a ritual to abet the onset of trance states, such as possession. Although the first-millennium and later texts do not describe oracular possession of gandharvas, they name other spirits or minor deities who supplant gandharvas in the local pantheon.

Possession by gandharvas is still reported in India. I was told the following while observing a vedic agniṣṭoma soma sacrifice in Kerala in 1995. According to the vedic śrauta traditions of Andhra Pradesh and Tamilnadu, the three most important parts of the agnicayana sacrifice are the recitations of the rudram, the camakam, and the ṣoḍaśī, and their accompanying offerings.159 The first two are well-known chants from the Yajurveda, while the third is a chant from the Sāmaveda.160 All occur after the construction of the great bird-shaped altar is completed, and every member of the sacrificer’s family must be in attendance at each of these recitations. According to local vedic tradition, the ṣoḍaśī must be recited exactly at sunset, the moment, they say, when Indra slaughtered the demon Vṛtra, a deed celebrated in the chant. If the ritual is running late, by even an hour (a very frequent occurrence), the action will be suspended for the next twenty-three hours, until the next sunset. Conversely, if it is ahead of schedule (a very rare occurrence), the ritual will be suspended until sunset. At a recent performance in Andhra Pradesh, one of the members of the sacrificer’s family was at the local well, rather than in attendance, at the time of the ṣoḍaśī chant. He fell into the well, as a result, it is said, of his inattention and absence of mind. When he was eventually pulled out, he was possessed by a gandharva, who reported to the crowd that had gathered that he was very unhappy that the person through whose mouth he was speaking was so unobservant. The gandharva then ordered him to recite the mantras used in the ṣoḍaśī chant continuously for forty-one days. He followed this instruction, and after that whenever he was seen wandering around the village, or anywhere else, he was reciting these mantras.161

In conclusion, let us return to a point that was discussed in Chapter 4 and begged discussion several times in the present chapter: Whether in antiquity or in the modern ethnographic record, the incidence of possession states was more frequent among women than among men. Although this is surely a matter of speculation, it may be confidently stated that it was a practice with much higher crossover between men and women than was classical vedic ritual, which was unquestionably men’s religion, with but a few exceptional instances of women’s participation. The examples cited from the BAU, from the vedic marriage hymn, and the prominence in general of women’s being possessed by gandharvas suggest the likelihood of this shared area of experience and ideology. The fact that women’s possession appears at all in texts composed by and almost entirely for men also supports this. However, the evidence is so fragmentary and incidental that it is unwise to speculate on the reason(s) for this, or indeed whether the reasons have changed over the ensuing millennia, except to say that it is practically beyond argument that the position of women deteriorated considerably during most of the first two millennia C.E. Furthermore, as demonstrated in these pages, possession was a common feature in stories about men as well as in “men’s religion.” An excellent example of this is the present-day vedic ethnography noted in the preceding paragraph, which attests that neither possession nor gandharvas as possessing entities are limited to women.