+++
title = "Political orientation"
+++

## Attractiveness
Commenting on a 2020 article which said "more attractive individuals are more likely to identify as conservative and Republican than less physically attractive citizens...results are consistent across datasets and  persist when controlling for socioeconomic status and demographics", MT said the below:

> While this should be understood as a statistical signal, this is generally in line with what I've seen. There is a strong role for attractiveness in both interpersonal interaction & general perception of public figures. This is even noticeable in the domain of knowledge. A physically charismatic teacher often attracts more students than an equally competent or better ugly teacher. It has a particular importance in **position of leadership**, where the leader often (not always) has to have that **charisma**. There are many ramifications of it: 
> 
> - 1. Physically unendowed persons feel a **resentment** & a sense that they do not receive the dues for their talents that are independent of their appearance. This fuels their **attraction towards counter-religions** & the left-liberal ideology (a 0-grade counter-religion) which channelizes their wrath towards the more endowed. This aligns with the victimhood theology that is at the heart of the West Asian counterreligions. 
> - 2. It translates directly into a **reduction of fitness**. In males this can be effectively channelized by leaders for **military opportunities**. In some cases it can erupt into social disruption such as the Nien rebellion among the chIna-s & perhaps even the Chinese brother of jesus christ. 
> - 3. On the flipside, it implies that a **great leader** will attract much **female attention**. However, this avenue is blocked by modern Occidental prudery & enforcement of monogamy. Thus, it results in powerful leaders in western and western-inspired countries often being dragged down for sexual exploits; e.g. Bill Clinton in USA. That in turn selects for a more "boring" ruling class which might not be able to inspire unlike the more organic ones. 
> - 4. This **differential attractiveness and mate access** could be a much **bigger destabilizing factor** for societies than people usually imagine, unless it is pacified in some way. Multiple such systems have arisen in different cultures for the masses, which might be eroded by modernity resulting in increased attraction towards disruptive movements. 
> - 5. Finally another factor which might play in is the personality trait for **cleanliness & hygiene**. Observations suggest that left-liberals are low on that trait: that might also interact with the attractiveness trait. In light of this the supposed association of certain **7TM olfactory receptor** variants with political orientation might be revisited. Is there a subliminal difference in olfactory perception between the politically differently oriented? 