+++
title = "01 Hindi"

+++
Variants of the Sanskrit āveśa and grahaṇa appear widely distributed in regional Indian languages. The unexpectedly late semantic conflation of √gṛh with ā√viś in Sanskrit is seen in several Middle Indo-Aryan languages contemporaneous with such usages in Sanskrit texts from the last few centuries of the first millennium C.E., which in turn set the stage for the all but interchangeable use of these verbs in New Indo-Aryan. In Hindi, āveś in the early Sanskritic senses of pervasion, absorption, and entry has been completely superseded. In addition to spirit possession, which is also a common meaning for the Hindi verbs caḍhnā (“to climb or mount,” hence its sexual connotations; “to become possessed”) and khelnā (to play) (cf. below, Marathi kheḷ,4 Panjabi kheḍnā,5 and Bengali khelā6), āveś discloses the senses of “charge, agitation, intense emotion, frenzy, wrath.”7 Erndl reports the use of the Hindi verb khelnā as illustrating the sense of possession as play, more specifically, the play of the deity with the person possessed. “When a woman is possessed, the goddess is said to take on a ‘wind form’ [pavan rūp], enter her, and ‘play’ within her.”8 Some of the terms for possession noted by K. P. Shukla, who conducted a sociological study of traditional healers in rural areas near Varanasi in 1969–71, are havā lagnā (to feel a breeze), pher (turn, curvature), kisī ne kucch kar (or de) dīyā hai (giving someone something, doing something to someone; probably indicating black magic).9 Ann Gold notes the term bhāv ānā (a feeling is coming) used in Rajasthan,10 while Beatrix Pfleiderer and Lothar Lutze note jāgar (waking [the deity]).11 Ruth and Stanley Freed note bhūt kī bīmārī (spirit illness), bhūt grasth (ghost possessed), and bhūt lagnā (attacked by a ghost).12

While not noting the vocabulary for “possession,” Ariel Glucklich, who worked on magic in Varanasi, does record the well-known colloquial term for a capricious spirit or ghost (bhūt-pret), which is attested throughout northern and central India.13 Bhūt (Skt. bhūta) is a general word for any kind of ghost, while pret (Skt. preta) more specifically designates a wandering spirit of the dead, often a deceased ancestor whose funerary rites remain incomplete or were performed improperly, if at all. Both bhūta and preta are past participles in Sanskrit; thus they may be said to represent the past, entities that have existed and gone away. We may suggest, then, that any model of spirit healing or exorcism admits the possibility that the obstruction and uncertainty that intercedes between the past, bhūta and preta, and the future can be ruptured and extinguished. In this sense, negative possession, which is to say possession by a bhūt-pret, locks an individual into a past that can be abrogated and (re)connected to the future only when the possessed personality is effaced. We explore this notion more fully in discussions on possession in the Mahābhārata below, especially in unpacking the story of the possession of Aśvatthāman by Śiva, the most powerful of bhūt-prets.
