+++
title = "02 Urdu: Hanumān’s Court at Bālājī"

+++
One of the most striking models of possession and exorcism, in which bhūt-prets play a significant role, occurs in the environs of the Bālājī temple in Mehndipur, Rajasthan, as well as at several other spirit healing centers in India.14 Most of the clients at Bālājī are Hindu, from Hindi-speaking areas of India.15 Yet in a slight acknowledgment to the once-dominant Indo-Islamic culture, the clinical model is replete with Urdu terms. These terms are drawn from the British colonial legal system, which adopted the Persian-Urdu language of the Islamic legal system of the Mughals. This is described in the work of Antti Pakaslahti and Graham Dwyer,16 but a summary is apposite here. The possession/exorcism rituals at Bālājī are not standardized; instead, they bear the distinct imprimatur of different healers and exorcists, almost all of whom work outside the main temple.17 Nevertheless, all the healers situate their exorcisms (bhūt-pret utarṇā)18 in an adālat or Islamic court, drawing their inspiration from the concept utilized at the main temple. This, it is important to note, is not an actual court; rather, it is an envisioned court and background metaphor, employed for instituting their processes of possession, exorcism, and healing.19 The primary deity, Hanumān as Bālājī, is the supreme magistrate. He is assisted by two subordinates, Bhairavjī (the local manifestation of the protector divinity Bhairava) and Pretrāj (King of the Spirits of the Dead), who are Bālājī’s messengers (dūt)—as Hanumān is Rāma’s messenger (dūta). Before visiting the office—usually a small shrine room—of one of the many clinicians in the town, Bālājī is first petitioned (darkhvāst) at the main temple. Whether pilgrim or afflicted petitioner, Bālājī is proffered sweets (laddū), parts of which are offered into a sacred fire (havan) in his name, while the remainder is returned to the client as prosād. After this offering, a larger petition (arzi) of sweets is served to Bhairavjī and Pretrāj in side annexes of the temple, where their shrines are located. Through their consumption of the prasād, the power of the deities is said to be infused into the clients. One or two days later, trance commences, usually during scheduled offerings (ārati) or devotional singing (kīrtan), which may occur in either the main temple or the “office” of the exorcist. This kīrtan (at least at the locale in Bālājī that I observed) consists of deafeningly amplified recordings of devotional singing to the melodies of Hindi film songs.20 This engages the largely Hindu audience21 of spirit afflicted (bhūt-pret kī bīmārī) individuals and their families, who chant along with the music, “Jai Mā, Jai Mā” and so on, and clap rhythmically—some of the standard accoutrements of shamanic “trance” music. The music that most often sends afflicted members of the audience (or concerned relatives) into trance, at least in the adālat that I witnessed, is instrumental “snake-charmer” music from a Hindi film of the late 1980s, Naagin, which, appropriately, inspires some of the possessed to writhe like serpents.

The word used for this trance is the Urdu peśī, literally a “hearing” or “appearance in court,” in which the classic symptoms of possession occur. Initially these include rhythmic swaying (jhumnā), literally “to move as if one were intoxicated, as a drunkard,”22 but eventually violent whirling of the head and upper body, hectic chaotic movements such as somersaults, writhing, sobbing, and so on. Women’s hair is always unbraided and left loose during the proceedings.23 During the peśī, at least in my observation of it, the client or the clinician’s assistant, performing as a surrogate on behalf of the client by temporarily taking the bhūt from the client, becomes possessed by Bhairavjī or Pretrāj.24 This double possession of the invasive bhut along with Bhairavjī or Pretrāj is understood as a battle between bhut and dūt, negative and positive entities and polarities of personality.25 It is often cast as a battle; the dūt may be assisted by an army of positive spirits, with its own hierarchy, called phauj (Urdu for “army”; or dūt saphāī [sepoy]),26 constituted of former bhūts that have been transformed into this lower grade of protective dūt by the exorcistic and analytical procedures of the clinicianritualist(s).27 If the clinician or his or her assistant has taken on the bhūt, the battle transpires within his or her body, which has also become possessed by the dūt.28 S/he then acts out the violence of battle in chaotic movements, with eyes turned back, hair flying, mouth foaming, and other familiar effects of possession. If the client has retained the bhūt (and often if not), one of the regular actions of the assistant is forceful beating on the back (usually the lower part of the spine) of the victim with the fists, followed by wrenching upward movements of the fists, said to drive the bhūt(s) up the spine and out the top of the head.

This, according to the model of the adaālat, is the punishment (sazā, daṇḍ) meted out to bhūt by dūt. It forces wildly uncontrollable shaking of the head and rocking of the upper body. Often the clinician (or the assistant) and the victim are both in possession, writhing and wrestling, both sets of eyes locked or rolled back. But the clinician or assistant, with much more experience and comfort in the adālat and a seasoned eye for the dynamics of psychosocial issues, particularly the manner in which mental distress bears on social dysfunction, has marginally more control of the situation. Therefore he or she is in a much better position to control the agendas and paths of rectification and healing. This process of administering psychological justice in the peśī usually must occur many times before the healing is fully effected, which is to say before the bhūt is completely extricated. This is because, according to Pakaslahti’s informants, “the possessing spirits are held to be deceitful (cālak) and full of tricks (dhokhebāz).”29 In this way the client becomes empowered or resocialized to the point of return to the normal flow of family life.

The penultimate step in this legal proceeding is the bayan, a confession or statement by the bhūts, who identify themselves, announce their departure, their next destination, and perhaps other significant information, such as why they have taken up residence there. Communication with a spirit, or more often interrogation, even harshly worded, occurs frequently in South Asian possession. This is considered beneficial for both the victim and the spirit.30 In this case, the confessions of the bhūts are spoken out after the battle has been suspended because of exhaustion of either the client or the clinician or his or her ritual assistant who has borne the bhūts. In this way the battle lines are drawn between bhūt and dūt: counterpossession of positive entities is required to combat possession by negative ones. Usually, the bhūt reveals the required information upon the relentless interrogation of the clinician or healer.31 This part of the adālat resembles a talking cure, a local variant of psychoanalysis that deals directly with the bhūt-pret, in which the clinician attempts to address the problems of the entity and elevate it into the ranks of the phauj, thus freeing the afflicted individual of his or her madness or dysfunctional condition. This is the local variant of the widespread phenomenon in both Hinduism and Buddhism of the conversion to good causes of “criminal gods and demon devotees.”32

As it turns out, most of the afflicted, as Dwyer has discovered, believe that the afflicting bhūt-pret is a Muslim spirit (jinn/jind), a dissatisfied ancestral spirit (pitṛ devatā), or a wild sexy female spirit (chūdāl, cuṛail) sent by a tāntrika in the employ of an enemy.33 Pakaslahti notes that the Hindi terms bhūt, pret, jinn, saṇkat, upari havā, and so forth “practically never occur with such adjectival attributes as ‘evil or malevolent’ (burā, niṣidh, pāpī, duṣṭ, etc.). The only preceding adjective used was, in fact, ‘unhappy,’ dukhi, connected to their descriptions as souls stuck in the past, hovering unfulfilled in the air, unable to proceed forward.”34 The implication here is that the conception of these as “evil spirits,” with the weight of the word “evil” emphasized, is a Western construction imposed on the Indic material. In fact, the Sanskrit material agrees with Pakaslahti’s findings; I have not come across any reference to a spirit that was “evil,” per se. This reconfirms that the exorcisms are designed to alleviate misery rather than evil, an important distinction when considering the healing process.

The final procedure in the adālat is parhez, home instructions, which often includes dietary advice—usually the elimination of heavy or inertia-producing (tāmasik) foods such as alcohol, meat, and garlic (because bhūts are attracted to these) and the addition of foods categorized as “cold” in āyurvedic medicine, such as barley—and the prescription of gifts of uneaten food offerings to cows and dogs. Despite this density of Islamic terminology, the terms for possession itself, in this case spirit-induced illness, are the more standard Hindi upari havā (breeze from above), bhūt kī bīmārī (spirit sickness), and jāḍu ṭonā or caukī (sorcery),35 while the chief clinician/priest/ exorcist/psychologist is termed bhagat, in conformity with other north Indian terminology.36

Although this model of possession, exorcism, and healing is exceptional in South Asia, it is not conceptually dissimilar to important models of death, possession, and corporeality found in China. I am not arguing for its transmission from China to India (or vice versa); the evidence is much too fragmentary and temporally disparate to suggest any kind of mechanism for transmission. I mention this only to point out that the idea of a court as a venue for an ontological life and death struggle of this kind is not entirely idiosyncratic. While addressing the oxymoronic topic of “postmortem immortality” in Daoism and early Chinese Buddhism, the Sinologist Anna Seidel notes that Han dynasty (206 B.C.E.–220 C.E.) funerary texts do not assign the dead to various realms based on ethical issues of karma, retribution, and expiation, as in later Buddhism, but present a “bureaucratized netherworld,” with its “hierarchy, its tax offices, tribunals, and prisons.”37 Like the bureaucratized parallel universes of classical China, the adālat features a hierarchy of celestial officials who judge and assist the condition of the individual. But the adālat is also the locus for attending to ethical issues centered on individuals who are dysfunctional and resistant within the structure of “family values.” In both cases, the rationale appears to be to present to the afflicted (and their families) closed structures within which mastery and control over spirits may be demonstrated and, in some cases, transmitted.

In later periods in China, the task of constructing a legal model for possession and exorcism was accommodated by the convergence of government official and priest, functions rarely shared in classical India. According to Edward Davis, who has written an extensive study of possession ritual in Tang (618–907) and (especially) Song dynasty (960–1278) China, Daoist ritual masters were almost always portrayed as government officials. The Tang court, Davis writes, “continued to employ at least fifteen master spirit-mediums (shiwu ) in the Imperial Divination Office (Taibu shu ) of the Court of Imperial Sacrifices (Taichang Si ) plus a number of related exorcists known as ‘Spellbinding Erudites’ (Zhoujin boshi , Zhoujin shi , or Zhoujin gong ).”38 During the Song dynasty, a “Rite of Summoning for Investigation” (kaozhao fa ) developed, an elaborate ceremony that included, among other elements, “the visualization of the spirit-generals and soldiers, the summoning of the demon, and the interrogation of his identity.”39 The spirit-soldiers (jiangli ), rather like those operating in the adālat, were marshaled to locate and identify an afflicting spirit, then at the command of the ritual master, “to seize, bind, flog, pummel, yoke, burn, freeze, or crush the demon.”40 This is reminiscent of the adālat, where the rhetoric of violence is commonly employed to exorcise bhūt-prets. In both cultures, disembodied ancestral spirits seek a return to the terrestrial world. And in both the adālat and the “Rite of Summoning for Investigation” (as well as other related Chinese models of exorcism), the burden of guilt is shifted from the individual to the invading spirit. “[I]t is the demon who confesses, not the patient,” writes Davis, in words that could be applied to the adālat, “and the demon confesses because it is only the demon who has something to confess. By disrupting the link between illness and morality in the patient, the … codes, regulations, and protocols of the fashi []41 locate guilt solely on the side of demons.”42 In South Asia, this practice of shifting the burden of guilt to a spirit, thus freeing the individual supposedly harboring the spirit from the social opprobrium of dysfunctionality, is not simply a psychotherapeutic folk strategy employed by exorcists and village healers; we see it in the Mahābhārata, composed perhaps two thousand years ago. In the story of Nala (nalopākhyāna), which we deal with extensively (Chapter 6), Nala’s conscience is clear in his rapprochement with his wife Damayantī, whom he has recklessly betrayed, because he has understood that he was not responsible for his actions while possessed by Kali, the spirit of darkness, a spirit that is in the end bound and burned.43 Davis adds—once again with words strikingly resonant of the adālat and, indeed, classical Indian mythic and medical literature—that “if the patient has become demonized, the demon ultimately becomes humanized.”44 The spirit seeks a return, a renewed strategy for expression and communication. Finally, Seidel points out that the Chinese word for “demon, ghost, wraith ” is a homophone of the word for “return” (kuei [gui] ).45 And, as we have seen, the primary Sanskrit words for invasive spirit, bhūta and preta, are past participles for common verbs of becoming and forward motion.

I have presented a somewhat detailed description of this not just because I have observed it, but because it contains many of the features of possession found in classical texts. First, these texts, being classical, have as their target audience an educated elite. Pakaslahti, citing data collected by Dwyer, states that “seeking help from Bālājī is not correlated with illiteracy, lack of education, low social status, poverty or a rural background as the patients are predominantly relatively well-educated, from higher castes, middle social class, and of urban domicile.”46 Thus this contravention of norms expected from a reading of Lewis’s and other well-known studies applies not just to classical, but to contemporary possession as well. Second, many of the phenomenological features of possession at Bālājī resonate with those in antiquity. These include positive oracular possession (āveśa) and negative disease-producing possession (grahaṇa), physical symptoms that approximate textual descriptions, the development of a meaningful and meticulously described imagery on which to fix the setting of polyphonous or multitiered personalities, a devotional impetus to the process, and the engagement of possession by Hanumān and Bhairava, the two divinities directly mentioned in the only Sanskrit manuscripts that I was able to locate that deal exclusively with possession as a prescribed practice. In addition, Hanumān as lord of bhūt-prets is reminiscent of other deities who command armies or troops, notably Gaṇeśa, “Lord of Hosts,” usually of undefined character or, more appositely, of Khaḍgarāvaṇa, a minor deity often associated with possession, who is specifically called bhūtarāja (King of Spirits)47 and bhūteśaṃ (Lord of Spirits).48
