+++
title = "04 Marathi"

+++
In Marathi āveś carries the same semantic range as it does in Hindi. J. T. Molesworth notes many compounds borrowed from or modeled on Sanskrit, probably limited to Marathi literature (they are less likely in speech, even among upper castes): kāmāveś (absorption or immersion in love), krodhāveś (anger), lobhāveś (greed), śauryāveś (heroism), piśācāveś (evil or evil spirits), harṣāveś (laughter), śokāveś (grief), īrṣyāveś (envy), kṛpāveś (a state of grace), and mohāveś (delusion).63 Unfortunately, Molesworth does not provide sources, but these appear to have been drawn from (highly Sanskritized) translations or perhaps from independent texts in Marathi on poetic theory.64 These terms bespeak the increasing use of āveś with words for emotions and states of mind that are attested by the end of the first millennium C.E. in Sanskrit as well as in Mahārāṣṭrī Prakrit. Rājaśekhara, writing in the Western Deccan around 900 C.E., has the following line in his ornate Prakrit drama Karpūramañjarī: tā vasantavaṇṇaṇeṇa siḍhilaāmi se taggadam āvesam (“Well, I must sing the praises of spring-time to him and so slacken his passion [āvesam] for her”).65

The dictionary of Old Marathi by S. G. Tulpule and Anne Feldhaus, covering texts through the mid-fourteenth century, lists three meanings under āveś/āveś: (1) force, power (jor); (2) fullness of heart (bhāvanotkatatā); and (3) wrath, anger (krodh, rāg).66 These meanings are well placed within the extended horizons of āveśa in Sanskrit literature. In spite of this Sanskritic influence in Marathi literature, the vernacular angāt yeṇe (lit. “coming to the body”) is the usual Marathi term for possession by a deity or saint.67 This is similar to the Hindi idiom for a deity “coming over” an individual: ūpar āna or ūpar honā: for example, us ke ūpar sāṃp hamesa hai (there is always a snake over him).68

John Stanley reports that the distinction between divine or desired possession (equivalent to āveśa) and forced or demonic entry (equivalent to grahaṇa or the general semantic tendency of praveśa) is maintained in contemporary Maharashtra (in other languages, such as Bengali, the distinction does not appear to be so marked). “Maharashtrian culture makes a sharp distinction between the two phenomena. Moreover, when the phenomena are analyzed as religious experience, they can clearly be seen as polar opposites.”69 Bhūt bādhā (obstruction by an evil sprit), conceptually similar to praveśa or grahaṇa, is experienced as “wrongness, chaos, disorder.”70 Conversely, “[f]or most people angāt yeṇe is immediately subjectively self-authenticating.”71 Stanley discovered that devotees of Khaṇḍobā drew a further distinction between spirit possession and infusion of power: Only the latter was regarded as a gift from the deity, and readiness for such an experience was rooted in bhakti. Indeed, bhakti-based ecstatic experience proved to be one of the symptoms of angāt yeṇe. Here we do see evidence of a nexus of ecstatic experience and possession, as Lewis presupposes; but the possession is not oracular and cannot be regarded as shamanic.

Feldhaus reports in detail on a kind of negative possession in Maharashtra of pregnant women by a group of minor divinities known as Sātī Āsarā (Skt. Sapta Apsaras) or Mālavayā (female beings who resemble ghosts [bhūts] or goblins [piśācas] more closely than they do full-fledged gods).72 In fact, they more closely resemble the skandagrahas (childsnatchers) discussed in the Mahābhārata and āyurvedic literature (see Chapters 6 and 12). In one ethnography, a woman from Pune who had experienced a number of pregnancies in which the infants died almost immediately after birth because she was “got” by these Āsarā was diagnosed by another woman from Pune in a state of oracular possession. The woman possessed by the Āsarā reported that the other woman guaranteed the birth of a son if she followed certain procedures: “Then she gave her word, in her possessed state [vāryāmadhye]. The god was possessing her [te dev vārā kheḷat hotā], you see. In that state she gave her word.”73 This is similar to the situation at Bālājī in that a possession was recognized and confirmed by another person in possession. The “cure” in this case was strictly ritual: The woman possessed by the Āsarā had to make certain offerings to them.
