+++
title = "06 Tamil and Simhala"

+++
In Tamil and Simhala,99 āvēcam (< Skt. āveśam) is perhaps the most common word for spirit or deity possession. Like other South Asian languages, Simhala betrays a linguistic nexus between possession and emotion: the substantive ävitu (possessed [by an evil spirit], mad) is related to the verb ävissenavā (to be angry).100 Obeyesekere, however, recognizes a much greater frequency in colloquial Simhala of ārūḍe (< Skt. ārūḍha [mounted]), divine possession, “in which the magnetism of the god infuses and suffuses the body.”101 This is distinguished from the equally common preta dosa (misfortune caused by an evil ancestral spirit or preta).102 The definitions of āvēcam in J. P. Fabricius’s Tamil-English dictionary are: “1. spectre, ghost; 2. the entrance of a demon into a person for the purposes of uttering oracles; 3. the fury or madness of a possessed person; 4. the grimaces of a person in ecstasy, religious frenzy.”103 The Tamil verb pukutal (to enter) is used in Tamil poetry where ā√viś is found in Sanskrit or Sanskritized Tamil. For example, Tiruvāymoḻi 9.6.3 reads, “With gentle grace he conquers, and enters my heart” (nīrmaiyāl nencam vancittu pukuntu), and 9.6.5 reads, “As if he were going to show his grace, / He entered into me” (tiru aruḻ ceypavan pōla ennuḷ pukuntu).104 On the word aruḻ in the Tamil Śaiva texts, Handel-man and Shulman note:

an unfortunate tendency to translate this critical term, in nearly every instance, as “grace,” with its heavy Christian connotations. Aruḷ can, it is true, correspond in Śaiva texts to Sanskrit anugraha, the god’s compassionate giving to his servants. More often, however, it approximates a notion of coming into being or freely becoming, present, close, alive. In village ritual contexts, aruḷ may mean simply “possession”—a presence intensified beyond bearing—or the experience of the deity’s true (nija, aghora) form.105

We examine this notion of possession as “coming into being” when discussing possession as a mode of devotion (Chapter 9).

Hiltebeitel records the Tamil substantive maruḷu (delusion, bewilderment), used for Asvatthaman’s murderous possession of the young Pañcapāṇḍavas in the folk Draupadī ritual.106 The use of this word for negatively charged possession distinguishes it from āvēcam. Hiltebeitel raises, without much discussion, the intriguing question of a connection between death, sleep, trance, and possession,107 a subject on which the Sanskrit texts are equally silent. Hancock notes a distinction (that I have not found in any other study) between āvēcam and other modes of deity or oracular possession. According to one of her informants, āvēcam refers to a general state of possession, while a “specific, temporary transformation” would be referred to with the observation “the ammaṉ has come” (ammaṉ vantatu).108

Another scholar with incisive thoughts on possession, and who has produced one of the most language-sensitive studies so far, is Eveline Meyer, who observed possession in the cult of the goddess Aṇkālaparamēcuvari in Tamilnadu.109 Meyer finds an ambiguity between possession and impersonation: Sometimes a man representing the goddess is possessed; at other times he does not achieve possession but completes the ritual by acting the part of the goddess. The latter is impersonation, asserts Meyer, because it is not considered to be genuine possession even by the participants. The possession about which she writes occurs within a non-brahman community, and it is important to note that both the culture and language in Tamilnadu are sharply divided between brahman and non-brahman.110 Like Hiltebeitel, she notes the word maruḷ, “used to describe the power and frenzy which takes hold of the pūcāri [Ta. pūjāri].”111 To be possessed is to “run frenzied” (maruḷ ōṭa).112 Nabokov, too, records the phrase maruḻ oṭutul (running in a state of confusion or frenzy), which she defines more strictly than Meyer as ceremonial flight after decapitation of a chicken that is intended to send a pēy (spirit) fleeing. Another form of possession is “dancing the god,” because of certain patterned or even choreographed dancing during deity possession.113 The Tamil term is teyyāṭṭam (god-dancing), while the Malayalam cognate is ttmyāṭṭam (festival dancing) or teyyam tuḷḷal (divine ballad/frenzy; Ta. tey, Ma. teyyam < Skt. daivam).114 Nabokov records the Tamil phrase kōriccu varutal (the request to come), corresponding to the establishment (Skt. pratiṣṭhā) of a deity in a shrine, examined below. This Tamil term refers to an “investiture ceremony” in which the spirits of dead relatives are installed “in the domestic sanctuary of the household as tutelary deities.”115

Possession of the deity Meyer studied was reported in the Indian press a few years ago. It is of interest that the Sunday Pioneer, a New Delhi newspaper, featured a front-page article headlined “THEY DIG GRAVES, CHEW HUMAN BONES & DANCE THE NIGHT” (March 4, 2001), which described “a frenzied procession to the graveyard where three chosen ‘incarnations’ of Goddess Angala Amman fished out the bones of the dead and chewed them up at midnight” on the night of Mahāśivarātrī (February 21, 2001). Leaving aside the obvious sensationalizing and orientalizing of this English-language report of a ritual among the relatively well-off Manai Telugu Chettiar community, who constitute 80 percent of the five thousand residents of Sundakkamuttur Village near Coimbatore, where the story was situated, the article reveals that there is a renascence of this sort of possession, at least in that village: “The annual event is a hit with the younger population. Surprisingly, the elders here have, of late, been trying to do away with the primitive ritual, but it’s the growing generation that has taken it up almost as a mission.” According to the reporter, R. Revathi, “A visit to the houses of a few bone chewers shows that they are literate and come from affluent families who have modern gadgets like television, refrigerators, washing machines, etc.” One of the bone chewers, eschewing the suspicion that they are tribals or cannibals, says: “We have Ministers and MLAs [Members of the Legislative Assembly] from our community.”

According to S. M. Chandrakumar, an advocate who has previously acted the role of one of the incarnations, “It’s our custom. In ancient times, an asura did tapasya to propitiate Lord Shiva. Gods, like Indra and Varuna, went to Shiva and asked him not to grant him a boon. But Shiva, touched by the asura’s devotion, granted him a boon of immortality. The asura then went on a rampage and killed many in Devaloka and threatened the munis. The sadhus complained to Parvati. But Shiva could not take back his boon. So he gave Parvati powers to eliminate the asura. Parvati came to Earth as Angala Parameswari Amman. She chased the asura who took refuge in a graveyard. To escape her fury, the asura entered a corpse. In order to kill him, Angala Parameswari Amman dug up every corpse in the graveyard. She ate up the flesh and chewed the bones and tied some around her waist and danced the ananda tandav. ‘We are the children of Amman and we’ve been doing this puja from time immemorial.’”

A comparative study of goddess worship in Tamilnadu and Orissa was conducted in the 1990s by Lynn Foulston.116 She cites the Tamil verb iṟaṇku (to descend), following Diehl, indicating the descent of a deity on a cāmyāṭi (see sami ati and cāmiyāti below) (god dancer).117 This, in its festival context, is a kind of positive oracular possession. Foulston notes several important facets of possession in the communities under study, including the honor and status accorded to those who enter into possession (mostly women, but also, on occasion, male temple officiants) and the imperative for the deity to possess the devotee. In Khurdapur, near Bhubaneswar in Orissa, “there is a strong indication that the goddess [Santoṣī Mā] must respond to the pūjāri if he approaches her correctly.” However, in Cholavandan, near Madurai in Tamilnadu, “possession was entirely dependent on the will of the goddess.”118 Among the purposes of possession, she notes, are problem solving, healing, and for the goddess to exercise her power, to demonstrate to her devotees that she “is a stable, constant force in an ever-changing and unpredictable world.”119

Elizabeth Fuller Collins, an anthropologist who studied possession at an important Hindu Tamil festival for Murugaṉ in Penang, Malaysia, called Thaipusam, also recognizes indigenous terminology. Collins observes that the Hindu Tamils of Penang recognize three categories of trance: sami ati (the possession of a pūjārī by a goddess or warrior deity); pey pirichu (lit. “having a ghost”; possession by ghosts or demonic spirits); and aruḻ (the trance of divine grace experienced by those who fulfill vows during religious festivals).120 Nabokov provides specificity to certain possessing spirits. The pēy “is the spirit of a man who took his life because he was prevented to wed, or because his marriage did not work out, and who henceforth ‘catches’ other men’s wives.” Nabokov understands this to symbolize the “obstruction and desecration” of marriage. “The pēy,” she explains, “represents a generic timeless entity, a ‘departed’ who cannot grow.”121 Although these representations may be valid in the community in which Nabokov worked in South Arcot district, it is likely that among the Tamils of Malaysia pēy is a general term for spirit, reflecting its Sanskritic origin, the word preta. Nabokov writes extensively of the pūvāṭaikkāri (woman who wears flowers).122 These are good spirits, who may be male or female, or even an indistinct collocation of deceased members of one’s lineage, despite the literal sense of the term. In a general sense the pūvāṭaikkāri is a deceased human spirit who returns as a god. He or she is invited to enter certain mediums during pūvāṭaikkāri pūjās, held to bless weddings, harvests, plantings, and other auspicious occasions.

Karin Kapadia has also studied possession of Murugaṉ in Tamil festivals.123 She focused her study on body piercing and the apparatus of ritual. Kapadia’s findings are very much in keeping with what is seen elsewhere, some of which we expand on later, when dealing with bhakti more formally. The word that Kapadia found used for possession among the largely middle-ranking non-brahman Tamil castes she studied was puḍiccikiraḍu. She arrived at two general conclusions: first, that devotees who experience possession are mostly female and that men in possession “become” female for the duration of the ritual, and, second, “that the lower castes do not share upper-caste assumptions regarding ritual purity,”124 an argument against the well-known assertion of Dumont and others.125 Most striking, though, is Kapadia’s observation that the social order is preserved in these rituals because they reinforce the notion that “only men can be ‘complete.’”126 By this, Kapadia means that men can become Ardhanarīśvara, Śiva who is half-man and half-woman, while women cannot assume this state. This “ritual androgyny of men”127 in possession empowers them to manifest female power (śakti), whereas women cannot manifest male power, which resides in stillness and inactivity, which Kapadia sees as the expressions of wisdom and knowledge inherited from brahmanical (viz., Sanskritic) discourse. Kapadia wisely does not attempt to generalize this observation to all of India. The point, however, as Hancock noted earlier (Kapadia seems to be unaware of her work),128 is that possession, transgressive and liberative though it surely is, reinforces key elements of the patriarchal social order.

It is striking that the psychological experience of possession of Murugaṉ, if not its ritual form, is similar to that expressed in the Akanāṉūṟu, a collection of Tamil poems dating from the first to third century C.E. George Hart notes that even at that time Murugaṉ was a deity popularly invoked for possession. Hart cites an early Tamil poem describing the dance of a shaman called in to treat a girl possessed by Murugaṉ: “It is the presence of Murugaṉ, hard to bear.”129

One final ethnographic study of Tamil possession deserves mention. This is a deeply moving study by Patricia Lawrence of the role of Tamil-speaking oracles in the recent Sri Lankan civil war.130 Lawrence’s study took place in the eastern part of the island, largely in Batticaloa district, perhaps the least-reported district of the war. “In eastern Sri Lanka,” she writes, “institutionalized possession is incorporated into the structure of pūjā ritual at temples for all local goddesses.“131 The civil war has brought increased public involvement in goddess cults, particularly rituals for Kālī that feature possession, blood sacrifice of goats or chickens (or ash pumpkins, their substitute), body piercing (especially of the cheeks with silver needles or triśūlas, the trident of Śiva, or the back with multiple fishhooks). At the time of Kāḷi’s annual festival in June, thousands of men, women, and children walk across burning coals, led by a charismatic “uttering oracle” (vākku solluṟatu), a possessed woman speaking with Kāḷi’s voice. All of this is performed with the ritual intention of healing the country’s ethnic wounds.

Lawrence makes an important contribution to our understanding of oracular possession, at least in the context of the torture, genocide, and horror that has been widely reported in this civil war. This is the element of pain. In addition to the bliss and heightened awareness of oracle and audience, there is an accompanying presence of pain. “Oracles describe śakti possession as a painful sacrifice of the body, reporting feelings of unbearable heat and a trembling like the ‘shivering when one suffers from fever.’ They may also, particularly if embodying the agency of Kāḷi, describe an overwhelming feeling of āvēsam,” which Lawrence renders as “uncontrollable emotion, fury, wrath.”132 The oracles, who have experienced the same torture, abductions, and genocide as practically all other Tamils in the region, employ possession as a therapeutic tool: as a special bonding strategy that embodies and renders sacrosanct their collective memory, translating their unspeakable suffering into a discourse of communal healing that undermines the discourse, and therefore the power, of the forces that have striven to strip them of their very humanity.133

Turning for a moment to classical Tamil, Māṇikkavācakar, in the ninth century, used the verb āṭkoḷ (to rule for oneself; lit. “to take to oneself in order to rule over [a person]”).134 This verb is usually translated “to enslave,” “accept as one’s slave,” “take possession of,” or “possess,” as noted by Yocum. Forms of this verb are not cited in the ethnographic studies, thus it must be assumed that at some point it fell out of favor in this context. Mention of possession and ecstatic dancing is found even earlier in Tamil, in the Caṅkam poetry of the early centuries of the common era.135 Perhaps the most richly detailed depiction of possession in early Tamil texts is in the well-known fifth-century epic drama Cilappatikāram. At the end of the drama the oracular possession of a brahman woman named Tēvantikai by the god Pācaṇṭaṉ is described. She was not alone, however, as the early Tamil texts frequently mention the possession of women. Indeed, for the realization of his own spiritual and religious instincts, it was not a problem for the male Mānikkavācakar to think of himself as a female devotee, subservient to Śiva.136 It is this sort of phenomenon that has led many scholars, such as Yocum and Friedhelm Hardy, to posit a movement of possession and ecstatic devotional madness from south to north India.137

## The Yakädura of Sri Lanka
Paul Wirz, Bruce Kapferer, David Scott, and Beatrice Vogt,138 in chronological order, provide deep, vivid, and often startlingly different accounts of Sri Lankan exorcists. These are called ädurā (Wirz: edura) or kaṭṭāḍiya (Wirz, also Obeyesekere: kattadiya), though the more proper rendering is yakädurā.139 Scott defines ädurā as a “practitioner of the arts of controlling the malign figures called yakku” (Skt. yakṣa),140 avoiding what he rightly regards as colonialist terminology (e.g., the more literal “demon master”). Another ritual specialist called bandhanaya (Wirz) addresses afflictions caused by planetary influences (grahacāraya) and black magic (bandhena). The bandhanaya confines and disarms demons and other evil forces responsible for these afflictions based largely on astrological remedies.141 The baliädura (Vogt) “eliminates disturbances caused by gods (deva) by means of an offering (bali) and other acts performed together with the patient.”142 Vogt classifies healing systems in Sri Lanka into five groups: (1) Western or allopathic doctors; (2) vedarala or āyurvedic doctors; (3) yakädura, who are versed in bhūtavidyā (see Chapter 12) and employ tovil or yaktovil, a wide range of healing rituals that are captivating and artistically integrated, and that may include masked dances, drumming, pūjā, didactic songs, and theatrical scenes, some of which are comical and contain ritually regulated dialogue; (4) śāstrakāraya, a group that includes astrologers and fortune tellers; and (5) bhikkus or Buddhist monks.143

I limit my comments here to Vogt’s study, for five reasons: first, because it is the least known of them; second, because she is a trained psychologist whose eye is different from the others’; third, because it lacks both authorial inclination and disciplinary pressure to anchor her study in postcolonial, poststructural, or Freudian positionings, a freedom, it seems to me, that is a refreshing characteristic of continental European scholarship; fourth, because her findings are in substantial agreement with Kapferer’s sophisticated views of the ritual, healing, and socializing processes involved in yaktovil;144 and, fifth, because she grapples seriously with the relationship between indigenous healing practice and Buddhist doctrine and belief. Indeed the latter is the crux of her study and is thus central to the project of investigating links between modern practices and premodern epistemological patterns and between folk and classical discourse. Vogt describes her project as “ethnopsychological research (1985–1988) on a healing ritual that is traditionally performed in the Kandy highlands as a treatment for mental illness.”145 She apprenticed with a yakädura called Upasena Gurunnanse, but conducted interviews with a substantial number of healers and patients in order to understand the healing process in afflicted individuals.

Through correlating specific material in canonical and semicanonical Buddhist texts with the statements of interviewees, Vogt strives to show that the basis of the nonmedically trained healing practitioners of Sri Lanka is canonical and historically situated Buddhism. This may not seem remarkable given that Sri Lanka is largely a Buddhist country. However, it is surprising given the attempts of anthropologists to assign the background of the healing process to other factors. The latter is in step with the model of many Indic scholars who separate healing ritual from canonical Hinduism, assigning it, instead, to other indigenous forces. On the whole, as Vogt is aware, and as is also argued in the present volume, most ethnographers are untrained, largely because of confining disciplinary boundaries, in classical and ancient Indic texts, and as a result are uninformed of the possibility and dynamics of deep cultural and structural continuities.146

Eschewing attempts to dichotomize Sri Lankan culture between high and low or Buddhist and non-Buddhist, in which the latter is disparaged as “folk religion” or pre-Buddhist animistic cult practice, distinctions that Vogt sees as the relic of Christian scholarship with its own history of forging these distinctions in Euro-American culture in order to rescue a “true” Christianity, Vogt instead sees the healing process as practiced by folk healers in Sri Lanka as an integral part of the local construction of Buddhism. I argue below that the distinctions Vogt questions are as untrustworthy in India as Vogt cogently argues they are in Sri Lanka. Although I might take issue with some of Vogt’s psychological theorizing, because the Jungian and other non-Freudian notions of “psychodrama” on which she bases her study are as underdeveloped as Freudian theory is overapplied (on the latter, see Chapters 2 and 12), on the whole I agree with her conclusions.147 Vogt states: “The analysis of terms used in the psychology of tovil underline my fundamental recognition that tovil healing rituals are a form of Buddhist psychology.”148 As a psychologist looking meticulously at Buddhist psychological categories, Vogt argues that such ritual is as firmly grounded in Buddhism as Western psychotherapy is grounded in Christianity. To this end, she marshals considerable evidence from Buddhist precepts as well as from abhidharma, the Buddhist analysis of personality and mental processes. She notes, for example, that Upasena Gurunnanse describes his method as, among other things, “bringing the demons under the control of Dhamma,”149 then dealing with five components of the personhood (pañcaskandha) of the demon (yaka [yakṣa], bhūta) as well as with the kamma (karma) of both patient and invasive being. She also shows convincingly that the mythic and cosmological beliefs of the Buddhist patients who came to the yakädura with whom she studied in the Kandy highlands were consistent with those of the Mahāvaṃsa (mid-fifth century) and other “histories” that have been transmitted in both literary and oral form for nearly two thousand years.150

Vogt also carefully avoids characterizing tovil as exorcism. The yakädura are not “spirit conjurers,” a term that she associates with exorcists, but that has been applied misleadingly to yakädura based on precedents from the Catholic Church. Although it appears that she unnecessarily limits the realm of exorcists and exorcism in her laudable goal of recognizing and setting aside the relics of a Christian mindset in relevant scholarship, especially in the field of comparative religion, she nevertheless offers a perspicacious analysis of the skill (upakkrama; Skt. upakrama) of the Sri Lankan healer.151 In this analysis, the

healer is characterized by: 1) concretizing psychic problems as “demons”; 2) re-educating these demons and relegating them to their place within the psychocosmos of the patient; 3) establishing an interpersonal consensus with regard to these demons or the psychic problems personified by them; and 4) therapeutic-pedagogic guidance of the patient by means of communicating to him patterns of knowledge and action that will make possible a happier way of life.152

With respect to the second of these points, which has been briefly addressed above, Scott emphasizes that “the first thing the ädurās have to establish is whether the virtuous commands (aṇaguna) of the Buddha are accepted as valid by the yakku (and the other malign beings—prētayo, bhūtayo, and bahīravayo).”153 That this process resembles the process employed at Bālājī in Rajasthan is simultaneously striking and unsurprising.
