+++
title = "07 Malayalam"

+++
Scholarship on possession in Kerala is now emerging, thanks in large part to the work of Sarah Caldwell, Rich Freeman, and Gilles Tarabout. Caldwell explores oracular possession among worshippers of Kāḷi. She writes about the performance of mudiyettu (divine offering),154 in which the goddess Kāḷi battles the demon Dārika. Caldwell notes that Kāḷi “will enter the actor’s body and consciousness as a great inner heat”155 and reports an informant saying, “We fix the picture of Bhagavati in our mind, and her supernatural power (caitanyam) enters our body.” Freeman asserts that the tradition of spirit-possessed dancers and priests in Kerala dates back two millennia, before Malayalam had separated from the linguistic and political domain of Tamil Caṅkam culture.156 Observing the teyyam complex in Kerala,157 Freeman demonstrates that ritual structure allows for spontaneity and improvisation, even one that contains stock phrases and memorized text.158 He insists that ritually circumscribed possession experience exhibits learned, context sensitive encoded gestures and behaviors that are not invariant, but permit a degree of improvisation. This alludes to the issue of “faking” possession, which has been the subject of considerable indigenous discussion and which Meyer generously labels impersonation. Tarabout has written a comprehensive study of sacrifice and gift in Malabar festival life, a study that includes major sections on oracular possession.159

Freeman also reports the Malayalam vocabulary of possession:

Whatever the type of being and circumstances may be, the onset of possession (āvēśam) is described as a “coming to” (varuka), “joining” (kūṭuka), or “mounting” (kēruka) of the body (meyyal). In this state the host is said to be “illumined” (veḷiccappeṭuka), “fixed” or “in-dwelt” (uṟayuka), to be “internally moved” (iḷakuka), and possessed of “spiritual vision” (darśanam).160

Freeman adds that the state of mind during the performance of teyyam “entails no loss of consciousness, or ‘dissociation’ in psychological terms, but rather a heightened sense of consciousness” in which “one’s consciousness has not traveled somewhere else, shaman-like, but that instead, one’s own body and mind are taken over and animated by a higher and more powerful (and I would add more concentrated) form of consciousness.”161

Caldwell explains that in Malayalam tuḷḷal “is a jumping, hopping dance undertaken in a fit of possession, fever, or madness.”162 It is difficult to ignore the confusion, ambiguity, or conflation of possession, fever, and madness in the eyes of Caldwell’s informants, a situation that haunts many ethnographers and surely skulks in the shadows in the present study. Nevertheless, her informants deploy Sanskrit terms when drawing broad categorical distinctions: divine possession of men is labeled dēva āveśam (which Caldwell renders “divine inspiration”), while spirit possession is called bādhā āveśam (demonic inspiration).163 Stuart Blackburn, too, is sensitive to the distinctions in possession that are revealed in the language. He reports that the general term in Malayalam for spirit possession is kōmaram; unwanted possession is rendered pēy piṭikkatu (caught by a malevolent spirit); and in a festival context a beneficent visitation is called cāmi mēl varavattu (the god descends). “False possession,” he says, is poy āṭṭam, while a “fierce dance” is payaṅkara (< Skt. bhayaṅkam) āṭṭam.164 Thus, Malayalam appears to have an extensive and highly developed vocabulary for possession.

Phillip Zarrilli, in his study of kaḷarippayattu, the indigenous martial art of Kerala, concurs with this observation of performed possession and extends it to the performance of martial arts. According to martial arts practitioners in Kerala, the essential elements for raising the kuṇḍalinī śakti are “self-confidence, doubtless heroism and internal fury.” This kuṇḍalinī śakti is “a state of intense concentration of energy (aveshakaram), ‘the power generated from concentration.’”165 Two points are significant here: first, possession can be a deliberately induced performative state; second, it commences with the identification of a specific emotive energy with which the practitioner is familiar, in this case, fury. Through repeated practice, the martial artist gains the ability to immerse the mind fully in this emotion. One of the qualities of this immersion is a condensation or compression of energy, rather than its dissipation in a multiplicity of thoughts or other forms of outward-directed activity. The maintenance of this immersion and subsequent compression during activity results in an attentive state of potentiality, power, excitement, and readiness that are observed features of the martial artist, the teyyam performer and, indeed, of anyone in a state of positive or oracular possession. It is thus appropriate that the Malayalam discourse of kālarippāyattu should employ the term āveśakāmm to signify this. These observations serve us well in the ensuing discussions of possession in “Sanskritic culture.”
