+++
title = "08 Tulu and Irula"

+++
The recent major studies by Honko and Brückner of possession cults and epic performance in Tulunad in South Kanara District of Karnataka represent culminations in a long scholarly interest extending back to the Abbé Dubois in the early nineteenth century.166 The spirits invoked in the performance of the Siri epic are benevolent, which Claus points out “may be hard to believe” given “the incredible discomfort and agony evident in the bodily contortions and facial grimaces of the possessed young women.”167 Because these possession festivals (būta nemā/kolā) are similar to Teyyam in both Kerala and Coorg District of southern Karnataka,168 it is not surprising that in some cases the Tulu vocabulary was influenced by Malayalam. For example, Claus reports the phrase “darṣana169 had happened to so and so” (arugu darṣana ātuṇḍu). This is one of dozens of words in Tulu for spirit possession, which is not surprising given the Tulu recognition of the pervasiveness of spirits—evident from the studies of Honko, Brückner, and Claus. Claus reports the common expressions are bhūta pattuṇḍu (the spirit caught) and mayṭu battuṇḍu (came into the body),170 and Brückner reports nuḍikaṭṭu (oracular speech).171 Thus Tulu, barely a literary language, shares in the same locutions for possession found throughout South Asia.

Typically shamanic oracular possession is also found among men of the minimally Hinduized Irula of the Nilgiris in southern Karnataka. Zvelebil notes, “Jāya [induced possession] is performed when the Irulas need divine guidance and help to solve a personal or public problem—whenever they want to obtain any assistance from the deity. The process is termed joga ugādu (inviting god [to descend and possess]) or jāya. According to Zvelebil’s informants, the deity “then enters the heart [īruvatte] of the possessed person [termed jāyakāra], which trembles gïdigïdigïdigïdi in an increased heartbeat rate, and it changes [māṟi] his mind [ge ṇa] so that it can speak through the possessed person.” The languages uttered are not always intelligible, but are thought to be either Kannada or an archaic variety of Irula. The possession trance is induced by drumming, swaying, and singing a “deity-inviting song” (dua uga pāṭṭu) in which the deity is addressed as “one who comes riding a black bee or dragonfly (dumbiyānē).”172 As in Tulu, what is noteworthy is the striking similarity of rationale, ritual strategy, and verbal imagery to possession noted throughout the subcontinent.
