+++
title = "11 Reflections on “Folk” and “Classical” in South Asia"

+++
From the foregoing discussion of lexemes and terms in many South Asian languages, one conclusion is unavoidable: that with a few notable exceptions the expansion of the lexicon for possession—and, we might cautiously presume, many of the ideologies behind this expansion—was to a great extent derived from Sanskrit and Sanskritic culture, after which it became diversified and adapted into regional languages. Despite this conclusion, the ethnographies highlight the non-brahmanical, non-Sanskritic dimensions of possession and the rejection of clerical authority in favor of a nonmediated transcendence or, at most, a transcendence that is sanctioned—and, therefore, in a sense mediated—by the dynamics of the local culture. Locally construed possession is, furthermore, an irruption of assigned hierarchical place that bears with it a consequent identification with nonhierarchical sacred place—indeed, of the individual as sacred place. Hence, it is an assertion that possession is largely the experiential property (and path) of people of lower social rank, women as well as men. It is regarded, in a critical mass of instances, as a socioreligious innovation of subalterns. Although this may be an overstatement, it is not without basis. After all, the social structure in South Asia hardened into a self-sustaining oppressive force long ago, giving rise to equally self-sustaining forces of reaction that drew form and idiom in part from these forces of oppression. In other words, though the preponderance of the evidence suggests that most possession is an indigenous phenomenon related to brahmanic oppression or “official” brahmanical religion only peripherally,222 in fact, a number of ethnographers (e.g., Sax, Knipe, Claus) have shown that brahmans participate in possession as much as anyone. Thus the “upward” accession of form and idiom is matched by a “downward” accession. As seen below, this is not a recent phenomenon: The evidence adduced from the Sanskrit texts testifies that possession has long been a part of unofficial (and preofficial) brahmanical religion; it was no less a part of Sanskritic culture than was officially engineered brahmanical religion.

Arguments that possession was “originally” a folk phenomenon distinguished from Sanskritic culture are, of course, correct, as far as they go. But these arguments cannot go very far, because folk culture by definition preceded Sanskritic culture and continued to flourish alongside it without operating in opposition to it. However, Sanskritic culture was never very far behind or far removed from folk culture. Indeed, one can argue that early Sanskritic, which is to say vedic, culture is nothing more than a poetic or literary redaction of folk culture. Folk culture was a part of Sanskritic culture from the outset. As seen in Chapter 5, possession (āveśa) was one of the defining experiences of the Ṛgvedic ritualists under the influence of soma, at least in the early, compositional periods of Vedic ritualism. One can conclude from this an identity of folk and classical during that period, the mid-second millennium B.C.E. At best this undermines the categories “folk” and “Sanskritic,” at least for these early periods of recorded Indian history. As for the later periods, however, as the gap widened between the literary presentation and the practice of Indian religions, we must conclude that the “origins” of possession in South Asia, whether brahmanical or non-brahmanical, Sanskritic, Dravidian, or “tribal,” are not particularly important.

Although the Ṛgveda suggests that its ritualists were familiar with possession, this does not mean that it was not also a widespread experience in non-vedic realms of early Indic folk culture. While noting the prominence of possession in folk ritual and theater, A. K. Ramanujan suggests that we do not find it in vedic or other exclusively Sanskritic ritual and theatrical forms. He writes that with respect to the “assumptions and characteristics” of folk ritual and theater, “notions of possession are never far from the audience’s mind.”223 We can probably assume that neither audience (and śrauta ritual was rarely as public as often assumed, based on its public patronage today) nor participants in vedic ritual, at least of “classical” or post–folk vedic ritual, looked for or expected possession. The emphasis on ritual exactitude far superseded expectations of immediate emotional uplift. Role playing was not expected to evolve into manifestation of the deities or sages whose mantras emerged from the mouths of the ritualists. Nevertheless, the evidence presented below suggests that Sanskritic, even vedic, possession cannot be ignored in discussions of more recent, even contemporary, cultural, religious, and linguistic parameters of possession.224

For example, the possession Hiltebeitel observed in the Draupadī cult in Tamilnadu occurred in a non-brahman population. This sort of folk possession, however, occurred as a result of long intertextual negotiations between an evolving local oral Mahābhārata and the Sanskrit epic,225 between Sanskrit renderings by professionals and folk retellings by local nonelite nonprofessionals (or even professionals), between classical dramatic performance that strived to maintain the Sanskrit plot lines and local performance that embraced non-Sanskritic folk elements. It is unlikely that the Draupadī cult’s Mahābhārata was a reaction against the classical text or against brahmans and brahmanical culture and religion. Instead, it is likely more accurate that it was a folk development in Tamilnadu that included some reconfigured and renegotiated elements of Sanskritic culture, among which possession was almost certainly one, given the substantial presence of it in the Sanskrit text (see Chapter 6). One fragment of evidence supporting this is the similarity of possession in the Tamil Draupadī cult and that which Sax finds more than a thousand miles away among brahmans as well as non-brahmans in another contemporary (but unrelated) Mahābhārata based sect in Garhwal. The linking element is clearly the classical Sanskrit epic in both its textual and performative incarnations.

Regardless of whether possession is viewed as brahmanical, it is, as we have often noted, prominently observed among brahmans. Not only does Sax find brahman possession in the Garhwal Himalayas, but it is widespread in the bhūta cult of South Kanara district of Karnataka, in East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh, and elsewhere in the subcontinent. Typologically, brahman possession is little different from non-brahman possession: Much of it is oracular and performative, not unlike non-brahman possession.226 Although possession states are trumpeted (sometimes correctly) as being “of the people” rather than “of the elite” (sometimes conflating brahmans with “the elite” when it is unjustified), at the same time their experience is often framed in the language of that much-ballyhooed elite. As mentioned, a cautionary note should be voiced to the effect that the dictionaries of the regional languages and the training of most of the lexicographers and many of the ethnographers are perhaps skewed toward a more classical (hence elite) expression, yet the evidence currently available nevertheless suggests a healthy diffusion of the terminology of possession from Sanskrit into regional languages, supplementing the terms independent of classical or Sanskritic sources. Indeed, even the countervailing evidence, notably from classical Tamil, cannot safely be marshaled to argue against Sanskritic influence.227

It must be admitted, however, that linguistic borrowing and influence cannot safely be equated with cultural borrowing and influence; words and terms can be borrowed from one language into another to express notions or denote objects that are already present in the intellectual or material culture of the people into whose culture the borrowing takes place. Such linguistic borrowing can occur for reasons of prestige or as part of a general pattern of cultural and linguistic borrowing in which extensive sets of borrowed cultural and linguistic information might contain a smaller number of items already present in the culture into which the borrowing occurs. In the present case, deity or spirit possession might have been a part of tribal or vernacular culture in South Asia before the terminological borrowings for it from Sanskrit and other derivative Indo-Aryan languages occurred. Remnants of tribal shamanism in South Asia suggest that this might be the case, as Rex Jones demonstrates a continuum of ideas and ideologies between tribal shamanism and “ecstatic possession” of Buddhists and caste Hindus.228 Jones’s observations are augmented by Berglie, who discovered spirit meduimship in Nepal among reciters of the Tibetan national epic, the tale of Gesar of Ling.229 What is striking about this for our purposes is that in this epic, Buddhism, which condemns loss of control, eventually emerges victorious over folk religious practice through a narrative acculturation in which peaceful Indian Buddhist mahāsiddhas are given Tibetan origins and identities as heroes and warriors. This merging of Buddhism, folk religion, and shamanistic practice eventually manifested in the practices of epic recitation, in which Buddhist narrators sung the glory of local practices, often while possessed by Gesar himself. “Now,” writes Berglie, “it is more or less an integrated part of Buddhist practice [that] the activities of the spirit-medium are placed in a Buddhist scale of virtues.”230 It is often the case in South Asia that we see these three levels of discourse palimpsested, from the early performers of the vedic śrauta sacrifices to Kṛṣṇa līlā performers to kathāvācaks of Varanasi.

Thus the Nepali example helps shed light on the history of possession in South Asia. Both Buddhism and “Brahmānism” were conservative movements, favoring literate text-based priesthoods, deities, and practices over spirit mediums, healers, and local gods, in short, the codified and predictable over the (ostensibly) uncodified and unstructured. The difference, however, between Buddhist and early Sanskritic and Indo-Aryan cultures is that the latter had ancient folk and shamanistic practice embedded within it, even if it lost much of its fluidity and dynamism over time. So the latter were in a good position to provide cultural and linguistic borrowings of phenomena and terminology of possession into vernacular, folk, and even tribal cultures over a very long period of time. The situation that Berglie reconstructs for Nepal and Tibet seems analogous to what occurred in other parts of South Asia thousands of years ago. Although it is possible, we must not assume that tribal and folk cultures preserve intellectual notions and a phenomenology of greater antiquity than those of the literate and dominant or hegemonic cultures.

It is relevant here to inquire into the identity of the possessing gods. It is clear from the ethnographies that most of these gods are “folk” rather than “classical,” that they appear to be the property of “little traditions” rather than the “great tradition.” If this dichotomy is projected backward by more than a few centuries, which is possible given the evidence of early first-millennium C.E. Tamil literature, then can one not argue that possession was a folk phenomenon Sanskritized in order to confer upon it credibility, rather than assuming that it was vernacularized and localized from Sanskritic culture? Although this question may be merely “academic,” the linguistic evidence suggests that possession pervaded both Sanskritic and non-Sanskritic traditions equally, as just suggested. In any case, proving a direction of flow may be impossible to accomplish definitively, because it would require historical reconstruction beyond what the literary and inscriptional evidence allows.

As for Sanskritic and folk deities,231 Antonio Rigopoulos, subscribing to the doctrine of a clear dichotomy between folk and classical, states: “Not all Maharashtrian gods possess their devotees. For instance, Khandoba, Kal Bhairav, Dattatreya do possess but not Ganesha, Rama, Shiva, Krishna, Vithoba, Hanuman, or Vishnu. The list of Hindu gods who do possess, corresponds closely to those ancient non-Aryan local gods who were gradually assimilated into the brāhmaṇic tradition.”232 But this is not strictly accurate, as I have heard in Maharashtra (where Rigopoulos worked) first-hand claims of possession by Hanumān, Gaṇeśa, and Śiva, and, outside Maharashtra, of Kṛṣṇa (in Nepal),233 the Buddha (also in Nepal),234 Viṣṇu (in Sri Lanka and Nepal),235 and, as we have seen above, possession by Śiva (as Mahādeva) in Assam (and as shown in Chapter 11, in Andhra Pradesh and in China) as well as in classical Tamil literature.236 It is therefore possible to conclude that in folk contexts classical deities (and other figures) become folk, just as it may be shown that in classical contexts folk deities become classical.237 A good example of the former is in the Draupadī cult, where possession of the Mahābhārata figures occurred under a decidedly folk aesthetic, while Kṛṣṇa as the supreme deity was replaced by a more culturally appropriate flesh-eating goddess.238

In contemporary India, most deity possession, even of brahmans, is by folk deities.239 Thus the question arises as to whether this helps decide the matter of the direction of flow, from classical to folk or folk to classical, that was left undecided by resorting to linguistic evidence alone. In my view it does not; as I stated above it fuels an argument for dissolving, or at least rethinking, the distinction between folk and classical. As argued above, what we now regard as the folk experience of possession may well have been at one time characteristically classical, as evidence from the Ṛgveda, the Mahābhārata, the tantric literature, and elsewhere demonstrates. So, from a very early date a South Asian culture of possession must have existed that enveloped Aryan and non-Aryan, brahman and non-brahman.

Catherine Bell deploys the verb “traditionalize” to indicate the act of constructing tradition and the substantive “traditionalization” to indicate the process of such a construction.240 These terms are useful in thinking about the history of possession in South Asia. Based on the juxtaposition of textual and ethnographic data, it appears that possession became traditionalized as it assumed recognizable forms that were deemed religiously empowering and medically safe, while operating within generous margins of social acceptability. This assumes sanctioned and appropriate contexts for possession, which must have been abundant given the range of possession manifestations in South Asia. Furthermore, this traditionalization must have occurred gradually and, to a great extent, beyond the active intellectual reach of the literary traditions. Examples of models of possession that have syncretized and traditionalized “popular” (viz., the products of less-formally educated strata of society) with “learned” (whether Sanskritic or otherwise) elements include the following: the adālat, where little-educated non-brahmans preside over an imagined court and administer ontological justice to members of all social and religious communities; the “accommodated heterodoxy” of Tibetanized Nepali bombo shamans; the Sanskritized kaḷarippayattu of Kerala; the performance of the Siri epic of Tulunad officiated by brahmans; and, elsewhere, the marginally successful efforts of New Age trance channelers to mainstream and market their possession “products.”

One of the powerful objectives of this traditionalization is to disseminate normative and paradigmatic discourse, in keeping with hegemonic or Great Tradition strategies of legitimation, which privileges theory over experience. In these cases, traditionalization and institutionalization operate synchronically. This may be distinguished from the processes operating in classical India, where, with rare exception in the Sanskrit literature (the exceptions being āyurvedic texts, a few Tantras, and dharmaśāstra texts on karmic ripening [kar mavipāka] examined in Chapter 12), possession was never accorded a place in any descriptive or epistemological order. In the latter case, it appears that possession was traditionalized without being institutionalized. In general, it escaped the discursive formalization that has always been an outcome of śāstraic institutionalization, while it nevertheless remained enculturated within the broad boundaries of Sanskritic culture. And its disappearance from this sort of epistemological institutionalization is what has rendered it largely invisible to scholars.

The ethnographies show that practices of possession can be classified into a small number of categories, regardless of region, from Assam to Sindh, from the Himalayas to Sri Lanka. This accords well with the general distribution of the terms āveśa and grahaṇa. The phenomenon of linguistic borrowing, in this case of loanwords, has long been studied, with the general consensus that borrowings of terms with abstract or “cultural” import proceed from a politically and technologically dominant culture into the languages of those under political control or less advanced technologically, while the opposite movement is true for terms for flora, fauna, rivers, and other “natural” phenomena.241 The provisional conclusion, then, unless and until further lexical and other linguistic data become available from regional languages and dialects, is that regardless of the unique manifestation of the possession experience in the non- and semiliterate local cultures, its expression was to a great extent framed by the language and conceptualizations of the elite, dominant cultures, whether Sanskritic or Tamil. This speaks not only of the extent of cultural relations between dominant and local cultures but of the prominence possession must have once enjoyed in the dominant culture before it became locally prominent among nonclassical, non-Sanskritic cultures. This is not to argue, however, for a trickle-down theory, a gesunken Kulturgut, of possession phenomena from dominant Sanskritic cultures to subordinate vernacular ones; in general, such theories have long been discredited. The sociocultural and psychological affinities of baiṭhak as performed in Peshawar with, for example, the possession rituals among the Jalari of Andhra Pradesh and the bhūta festivals among the Tulu speakers in Karnataka testify to a broadly distributed cultural form with regional variations that was (and remains) inclusive of Sanskritic culture and, in many places, eventually came to adopt its primary expressions. It is important to note, too, that specific “religions” do not sequester particular domains of possession. Shail Mayaram, who studied possession in Ajmer, Rajasthan, records that a Hindu woman regularly reports possession of Imam Husayn, the grandson of Muhammad, known locally under the eclectic name Pīr Bābā. Conversely, Mayaram notes that a Muslim woman healer reported regular possession of a local mother goddess called Bayasaab Mātā.242

Let us now attempt a composite depiction of possession based on the ethnographies alone. Possession more often than not involves the feminine—either women are possessed or men are possessed by a form of the goddess. In fact, Caldwell suggests that men’s possession might have been inspired by women’s, at least in Kerala. Possession also tends to be ritualized, often in highly developed calendrically based rituals, religious festivals, or pilgrimages. It is often a part of religious practice (sādhtma)—also a feature of Sanskritic possession—and often involves an imitatio dei, as we investigate further in the discussion of āveśa in the realm of bhakti. Possession frequently begets violence, usually sacrificial though occasionally self-inflicted, such as the body-piercing Meyer observed in Tamilnadu and Lawrence in Sri Lanka. Often the individual possessed bears a visage of pain, writhing or screaming, though there is usually no memory of this. It is as if the pain were caused by trying to fit something big, frightening, wild, powerful, awesome, unfamiliar and beautiful into a small, limited, culturally conditioned enclosure. Sometimes, the awesome dominates, resulting in ecstatic wailing, but often the frightening dominates, as the deity (herself, usually) becomes wild and frenzied. Meyer has noted that the frightful possessing goddess is compared to a ghost or flesh-eating spirit (Ta. pēy, picācu < Skt. preta, piśācd). A summation of the ethnographic reports thus permits the observation that the cries of the possessed are, on the one hand, the cries of psychic pain and sheer fright at the power of the possessing agent, while, on the other hand, they are the joyful shrieks arising from the unleashing of repressed sexuality, aggressive emotions, and ecstasy paradoxically generated by the frightening deity (or spirit). The result is an empowerment centered on a wave of devotion to the possessing agent, like power generated from a great dam, whose bound waters nourish and drown. Possession is also healing; demarcated by a secret semantics of liminality, it assuages the wounds of individual and community.

A final question we must consider here is eligibility (Skt. adhikāra). Who is eligible for possession? Who is possessed? The issue of eligibility in India is as old as the middle vedic literature, when criteria were fixed for eligibility to perform vedic śrauta sacrifices. Discussions of eligibility were formalized in the Pūrvamīmāṃsāsūtras of Jaimini around the third century B.C.E. and have been argued, refined, and modified constantly since then.243 Without doubt, the issue of adhikāra has been a brahmanical, elitist issue that has served socially polarizing ideologies within Indian society as well as the brahamanical historiographical enterprise, as Pollock has shown.244 However, possession is a populist, egalitarian phenomenon that has persisted almost entirely beyond the reach of śāstra or formal brahmanical discourse. Why, then, should this question arise? First, possession has taken on many disguises in South Asian history in the past three or more millennia, and at least a few of them were determined or assisted by the acquisition of particular training or levels of initiation. This is evident in the classical period in certain Tantras and bhakti texts and, more recently, in possession festivals in Kerala, Tamilnadu, Garhwal, and elsewhere. Second, the question is of importance because of the likelihood of the influence of Sanskritic culture on popular possession.

Although the ritualization of possession as noted in ethnographies does not resemble classical Vedic ritual, the concept of divinization of the body is a theme that runs through Indian religion from the middle vedic literature to contemporary possession performance. We have already examined the phenomenon of the “localization” of divinity in southern India, the narrative act of establishing and circumscribing sacred space in a person, place, or thing. What is relevant here is that this act helps to establish eligibility, conferring a zone of safety, rather than danger, on possession. Possession is not risk-free; it may be dangerous or harmful unless the individual acquires eligibility through initiation, formal training, frequent exposure to others’ possession (which may also be a kind of training), or heredity. Thus eligibility is of great concern to the communities practicing possession. Certain individuals are authorized by the community and occupy a correspondingly higher place in the social structure, as would a formally educated priesthood. For example, Dirks notes that the cāmiyāṭi (possessed “deity dancers”) in the Aiyanar festivals in Pudukkottai District of Tamilnadu were “initially chosen for possessing special spiritual powers,” but that the position eventually became hereditary.245

Also prominent is an endemic sense of what is genuine possession and what is pure theater, especially in narrative or festival performance. Zvelebil distinguishes between “genuine possession” and “pseudo-possession,” the former characterized by hieratic trance and the latter either feigned outright or the product of passion. Genuine possession, he says, is a form of “regulated contact with the sacred,” while pseudo-possession is expressed in “poetic conventions dealing with the erotic.”246 This is a distinction that may apply “on the ground,” but, as shown in the following discussions, these are more generally regarded as different modes and discourses of possession than distinct states of genuine and pseudo-possession. This complicates the field of eligibility, in which Zvelebil’s category of “genuine possession” would bear the greatest weight of the criteria for eligibility. It will be of interest to see how Zvelebil’s categories withstand the evidence of classical literature.

In living cultures in which possession is recognized, much of it is oracular, used for divination, healing, and mediumship. It is in these forms that standards of eligibility are most important. But some possession, including (occasionally) oracular, is exhibited in a manner suspiciously akin to madness or intoxication. Although this worries family members, in most cases it is interpreted as the inspired presence of the deity. Thus a post facto form of eligibility is invoked. This exhibition of divine presence as frenzy (a culturally sanctioned dissociative state) is a respected and recognizable part of the tradition of imitatio dei. Already in the ninth century the Tamil poet Mānikkavācakar was calling Śiva a madman (pitttaṉ).247 To what extent madness, as well as contextual notions of eligibility and the localization of sacred space, are shared with possession as reckoned from the classical sources will come into sharper focus in the following discussions. But at the very least we can posit that possession appears to have undergone development with changing social and cultural environments, that it may not be what it once was, at least not completely—in spite of millennia of alleged obfuscation by various orthodoxies who made it their business to try to manage the unmanageable.
