+++
title = "+4 Notes on Regional Languages and Models of Possession"

+++

Lexicography, Languages, and Themes

This chapter takes account of the tendency of Sanskritists and other scholars of Indian antiquity to disregard religious form not tied directly to texts. Similarly, it takes account of the tendency of anthropologists and other ethnographers who distrust texts and are therefore not willing to look beyond their own ethnographies for the possibility of important antecedents in classical textuality. I aim to close these gaps, at least to some degree, with respect to possession by integrating material from Sanskrit sources into a primary discussion of both the language of possession in modern India and models of possession that are intertwined with these languages.

First I must state emphatically that it is impossible to provide a complete record of the language of possession in all South Asian languages or, for that matter, in all eighteen recognized “national languages” of India or even in more than a few of them with any degree of authority or thoroughness. Comparative studies of the vocabulary and linguistic idiom of any single religious phenomenon as it is represented in all the major regional languages is, to my knowledge, uncharted territory, not to speak of similar comparative studies of nonliterary or “tribal” languages, as well as dialects and subdialects of a single major language such as Hindi or Tamil. The difficulties involved in amassing the necessary raw lexical data for such a project are, quite simply, overwhelming. Perhaps this will be possible after another quarter of a century, when optical character recognition equipment for South Asian scripts are perfected and databases with literary, lexicographic, and ethnographic material are more complete and integrated. Under current conditions, therefore, I can strive only to produce a few examples of vocabulary and idioms for possession in a few South Asian languages for which such studies have been undertaken. Unfortunately, even the best ethnographers, linguists, and lexicographers have sometimes neglected to provide the specialized vocabulary of possession in their work. It is often assumed that the phenomenon itself is all that is important, not how the group or individuals under study represent it linguistically or what the cultural or mythic comportment underlying this linguistic usage might be. This neglect has contributed to the mistaken notion that possession is just one thing and renders it easy fodder for established Western categories. While lamentable, this tendency is also correctable.

The Indian languages best served by sensitive ethnographers of possession are Hindi, Marathi, certain languages and dialects of the Himalayas (including Ladakhi and Nepali), Bengali, Tamil, Malayalam, and (interestingly) Tulu. The most intensively researched languages are Tamil, Malayalam, and the Himalayan languages, as these opposite ends of the subcontinent have become preferred territory for possession research.1 The primary sources necessary for a proper determination of possession in regional languages are, in addition to the ethnographies, the early regional literature, dictionaries of vernacular languages modeled after European lexicographies, and traditional lexicographic works (kośas).2 The primary benefit of the early vernacular literature is that it provides insight into the history of both the language used and the experiences denoted by that language. The disadvantage is that this literature was not written to present complete linguistic records, but is intrinsically fragmentary. The dictionaries benefit from their completeness, but are far too often riddled with problems. First, they are often skewed toward Sanskritic interpretations. Second, they too often passively accept Western categories. This is especially prominent when translating from one language to another, for example, from English to Tamil or Hindi to English. It must be said, however, that the problem of translating concepts and categories—when the assignment is to translate words with the briefest precision—is, in most cases, an exercise in futility. Third, a lexicographic format almost always struggles to meet the demands of context, which is to say that most dictionaries provide practically no historical accounts of word usage.3 This renders it impossible to know which words are most important and widely used and which are rare and perhaps idiosyncratic. As for the ethnographies, their great advantage is a vivid portraiture, while, as mentioned, their disadvantage is an often complete absence of deep historical and linguistic contextualization.

The following account attempts to consider images and models of possession and exorcism, for example, possession as “riding” (Hindi, Nepali, Simhala, Malayalam), as “dancing” (Tamil, Malayalam), as an “attack” (Hindi, Nepali), as a force “coming into the body” (e.g., Hindi, Marathi, Tulu, Irula), as “play” of the deity (Hindi, Marathi, Nepali), as a kind of “ecstasy” (Bengali, Marathi, Nepali), as a “weight” (Bengali), as a marker for intense emotional engagement (Sanskrit, Malayalam, Bengali, and many others), as an idiom for impersonation (Tamil), as an emblem of political oppression (Ladakhi), as a sign of debilitated life force (Ladakhi, Sanskrit), as part of a multicultural dialogic interaction (Ladakhi, Nepali), or as a symptom of a multilayered world visible “as if in a mirror” (Tibetan, Sanskrit). Similarly, exorcism has a varied set of images, for example, it can occur in an imagined legal court (Urdu) or serve as communication with a spirit for the sake of rectifying its own history of wrongdoing (Urdu, Simhala). In addition, the rich vocabulary found for exorcists and other possession mediators reflects healing and other culturally integrative roles taken on by these ritual functionaries, including conjurer, scholar, priest, herbalist and medicine man, storyteller, protector of the evil eye, and performer. The semantics of possession in regional South Asian languages reveals the important role that it has assumed in South Asian culture and therefore sets the stage for the ensuing discussions of possession in the ancient and classical literature, literature that cannot reflect such a diverse number of languages or local cultures. This should contribute to ongoing discussions of the continuities and disjunctions within South Asian cultural history, to the development of the language of emotion in South Asia, and to reflections on the relationship between the folk and the classical in South Asia, a discussion that closes this chapter.
