+++
title = "02 THE MĀTṚKĀS IN THE LATER TRADITION"

+++

The popularity of the Mātṛkās in the postepic period \(after A.D. 400\) is attested by the many casual references to them in literary works. The *Natya-śāstra* recommends that the Mātṛkās be worshiped prior to setting up the theater and stage for dance performances \(13.66\),13 Both the *Cārudatta* of Bhāsa and the *Mṛcchakaṭika* of śūdraka refer to offerings made to the Mātṛkās at crossroads.14 The *Harṣacarita* of Bāṇabhaṭṭa mentions an ascetic who dwells at an old *matṛ-gṛha*, a “house \(or temple\) of the Mothers,” where young nobles perform rites on behalf of the king’s health. “There young nobles were burning themselves with lamps to propitiate the Mothers.”15 In the *Kādambarī* the queen Vilāsavatā wishes to have a son. She performs a variety of rites and resorts to a nearby shrine to the Mātṛkās, “in whom faith was displayed by the people.”16 The many literary references to the Mātṛkās in the postepic period are echoed by their numerous images and by the many inscriptions that mention them and their temples.17

The number and names of the Mātṛkās become increasingly standardized in the postepic period until a more-or-less standard list of seven goddesses begins to become synonymous with the Matṛkās. The appearance of these seven goddesses is quite modified from the Mātṛkās of the epic. In the medieval period they are patterned \(at least in appearance\) on male deities of the Hindu pantheon. Furthermore, they are usually portrayed in mythology as combating demons who threaten the gods or the stability of the cosmos. Thus, in some ways, the Mātṛkās seem to have been Brahmanized and domesticated.

Perhaps the best-known mythological account of the Mātṛkās in the medieval period is found in the third episode of the *Devī-māhātmya*. There the demons śumbha and Niśumbha, who have usurped the gods from their positions, are confronted in battle by the Devī. When the demon armies approach her, the male gods, who are watching from the sidelines, create *śaktis*, female counterparts of themselves, to help the Devī on the battlefield. Seven such *śaktis* are created, and in appearance they closely resemble the male gods from whom they are said to arise: Brahmāṇī, created from the god Brahmā, holds a rosary and water pot; Māheśvarī, created from Śiva, is seated on a bull, holds a trident, wears serpent bracelets, and is adorned with the crescent moon; Kaumarī, created from Kārttikeya, rides a peacock and holds a spear; Vaiṣṇavī, created from Viṣṇu, is seated on Garuda and holds a conch, *cakra* \(discus\), mace, bow, and sword; Vārāhī, created from the boar *avatāra* of Viṣṇu, has the form of a boar; Narasiṁhī, created from the man-lion *avatāra* of Viṣṇu, has the form of a woman-lion and throws the stars into disarray with the shaking of her lion’s mane; and Aindrī, created from the god Indra, holds a thunderbolt and is seated on an elephant \(8.11–20\). Charging into the fray, this group of *śaktis*, collectively called the Mātṛkās \(8.38, 44, 49, 62\), tears into the demon army and begins to slaughter them. Along with Kālī \(who is also called Cāmuṇḍā\), Śivadūtī \(a goddess formed from the *śakti* of the Devī\), and the Devī herself, the Mātṛkās devastate the demons. After the battle the Mātṛkās dance, drunk with the blood of their victims \(8.62\). This description of the Mātṛkās is repeated with very little variation in the *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇ* \(5.28–29\) and the *Vāmana-purāṇa* \(30\).

Despite the names, appearances, and origins of the Mātṛkās in the *Devī-māhātmya* and *Devī-bhāgavata-purāṇ* accounts, it seems clear that they are to be understood not primarily as the divine consorts or the *śaktis* of the male deities but rather as extensions or forms of the Devī herself. Indeed, in the later episode of the *Devī-māhātmya*, after Niśumbha has been killed by the Devī and her female cohorts, the demon śumbha challenges the Devī to single combat, in effect complaining about her many female allies. In response to his challenge, she absorbs into herself all the Mātṛkās. She refers to them as just so many of her different forms \(10.2.-5\). In the *Vāmana-purāṇa* account of the Mātṛkā episode the situation is even clearer. There the Mātṛkās arise from the different parts of the Devī’s body and not from the male gods at all, although they are described and named after the male deities \(30.3–9\).



Vārāhī, one of the Mātṛkās. Thirteenth or fourteenth century A.D. Pratapaditya Pal, *Nepal, Where the Gods are Young* \(New York: Asia Society, 1975\), fig. 70, p. 102. Reprinted by permission of Eric D. Morse.

The different versions of this episode do not stress the individuality of the seven goddesses. By and large the seven act as a group and share the same characteristics: they fight ferociously and get drunk on blood. In the *Matsya-purāṇa* the Mātṛkās appear in a slightly different context. They are created by Śiva to combat the demon Andhaka, who has the ability to duplicate himself from each drop of blood that spills from him when he is wounded.18 The Mātṛkās are instructed to drink up his blood and thus defeat him. This they gladly agree to do. Although the traditional seven Mātṛkās are mentioned in the text at the head of the list of goddesses, roughly 190 names are given, along with the comment that there are many others.19 It is difficult to escape the conclusion that the *Puraṇa* writers are primarily describing a group of goddesses whose individual members are not significant in themselves.20 This is also quite in keeping with references to the Mātṛkās in the *Mahābhārata*. By restricting their number and relating them to male gods, the *Purāṇa* writers have to some extent brought the Mātṛkās into the mainstream literary and mythological tradition.

The *Purāṇa* writers have also sought to modify the inimical character of the Mātṛkās by describing their primary role as the Devī’s \(or Śiva’s\) assistants in combating demons. In the Purāṇic accounts they are seen as primarily fierce, effective warriors who protect the stability of the world by combating demons. They are understood as extensions of the Devī in her role as guardian of the cosmic order. The wild, inimical, bloodthirsty character of the Mātṛkās is not entirely hidden in these accounts, however, and probably testifies to the fact that they have not changed much over the centuries and are in some ways the same dangerous beings mentioned in the *Mahābhārata*. Their taste for blood, for instance, remains in some of the Purāṇic accounts. The *Devī-māhātmya* also describes the Mātṛkās as getting drunk on the blood of their victims \(8.62\).

Similarly, in the *Matsya-purāṇa* account the Mātṛkās, at Śiva’s command, defeat Andhaka. They are described as terrible in appearance and as drinking the blood of the demons they slay. After the battle the Mātṛkās announce that they will now proceed to devour all the gods, demons, and people of the world. Śiva commands them not to do this, but they ignore him and begin a rampage of destruction. Śiva summons Narasirṁa, Viṣṇu’s man-lion *avatāra*, who creates a host of benign goddesses; they in turn calm down the terrible Mātṛkās and stop their destruction. At the end of the episode it is said that Śiva’s own terrible form as Bhairava is enshrined with the images of the Mātṛkās at the place where this battle took place \(179.8–90\).

In the *Varāha-purāṇa* the Devī, who is called Vaiṣṇavī in this account of the creation of the Mātṛkās, is doing asceticism on Mount Mandara. At one point she loses her concentration; from her distracted mind are created several beautiful female attendants, who later become the Devī’s helpmates on the battlefield when she fights demons. Although the Mātṛkās are described as lovely in this account, it is important to note that they are born when the Devī loses control of her concentration. This suggests the Mātṛkās’ essentially uncontrolled natures. Born from lack of mental control, they lack control themselves.21

The malevolent nature of the Mātṛkās also seems clear in several passages from the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa*. When the races and species of beings created by Viṣṇu are listed, the Mātṛkās are mentioned with the *uragas, rākṣasas, piśācas, bhūtas*, and other dangerous kinds of beings \(2.10.37–39\).22 It is difficult not to suppose that the Mātṛkās, like these other beings, are terrible in character. Elsewhere in the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa* they are mentioned with the *bhūtas, ḍakinīs, vetālas, pretas, piśācas*, and other malign beings as part of Śiva’s army \(10.63.6 ff.\).23 Again, from the context, it appears certain that the Mātṛkās are understood as a dangerous group of goddesses. When Kṛṣṇa kills the demoness Pūtanā, who has tried to kill the baby god by suckling him with her poisoned nipples, the cowherd women carry out protective rites to keep Kṛṣṇa safe from future harm. At the end of their rituals, they say: “May the Dākinīs, the Jatādhārīs, . . . the goblins, the Mātṛs, the Piśācas, . . . etc. \[and\] other evil omens and calamities dreamt of, the slayers of the old and the young, and these and other evil spirits be destroyed, being terrified at the recital of the name of Viṣṇu” \(10.6.27–29\).24

In the *Viṣṇudharmottara-purāṇa*, after the Mātṛkās defeat the demon Andhaka, the text dwells at length on how the evil influences of the Mātṛkās can be avoided \(1.227\) .25 The *Varāha-purāṇa* relates them to vices or inauspicious emotions: “Yogisvarī is the symbol of lust, Māhesvarī of anger, Vaiṣṇavī of greed, Kaumarī of attachment, Brahmāṇī of pride, Aindrī of jealousy, Cāmuṇḍā of depravity and Vārāhī of envy” \(17.33–37\).26

Although the Mātṛkās are reduced to seven, eight, or sixteen goddesses, each related to a male deity of the Hindu pantheon, and although they are made to serve a role supportive of the dharmic order in many Purāṇic accounts, throughout their history they remain primarily a group of goddesses, unspecified in number, who are inimical in nature and particularly dangerous to children. None of the Mātṛkās is significant by herself, either as an independent goddess or as the spouse or *śakti* of her male counterpart.27 The restriction of the number of Mātṛkās and their association with male deities, then, is artificial and to some extent arbitrary. The Mātṛkās are primarily an independent group of goddesses who have violent natures, are associated with diseases, and are particularly prone to afflict small children. Many local or village goddesses are also associated with diseases that afflict children, are routinely served with blood, and are held to have violent natures. It is quite likely that the Mātṛkās of the Hindu literary tradition beginning with the *Mahābhārata* can be identified with those goddesses, who are so central to the religious life of most Hindu villagers.28



