+++
title = "03 CHINNAMASTĀ"

+++

Chinnamastā, like Tārā, is also popular in Tantric and Tibetan Buddhism. In Buddhism she is known as Vajrayoginī. The Buddhist Tantric text, the *Sadhanamālā*, describes her as follows:



Vajrayoginī . . . carries in her left hand her own head severed by herself with her own Kartri held in her right hand. Her left hand is raised upwards while the right is placed below. She is nude, and her right leg is stretched while the left is bent down. He \(the worshipper\) should also meditate on the streams of blood issuing from the severed body as falling into the mouth of the severed head and into the mouths of the two Yoginīs on either side of her.

He \(the worshipper\) should also conceive the two Yoginīs to the left and right . . . , both of whom carry the Kartri in their left and right hands respectively. . . . Their left and right legs respectively are stretched forward, while the other legs are bent, and they have disheveled hair. On all sides, between the two Yoginīs and in the firmament there is the awful cremation ground.49

The Hindu deity Chinnamastā is similarly depicted. In most Hindu renditions three jets of blood spurt from the cut stump of her neck. One jet streams into the goddess’s own mouth, while the other two flow into the mouths of the two flanking *yoginīs*. The goddess usually holds her own head on a platter, as if about to make an offering of it. Beneath the goddess the god Kāma, personifying sexual desire, and his wife, Rati, are engaged in sexual intercourse, she usually on top. They are stretched out on a lotus, and the backdrop is often a cremation ground.50

Chinnamastā is probably the most dramatic, stunning representation in the Hindu pantheon of the truth that life, sex, and death are part of an interdependent, unified system. The stark contrasts and reversals of what one would normally expect to see in this iconographic scenario—the gruesome decapitation, the copulating couple, the cremation ground, all arranged in a quite delicate, harmonious pattern—jolt the viewer into an awareness of the truth that life feeds on death, is nourished by death, necessitates death, and that the ultimate destiny of sex is to perpetuate more life, which in turn will decay and die in order to feed more life. As arranged in most renditions, the lotus and the copulating couple appear to provide a powerful life force for the goddess, who is standing on the back of the copulating woman. The couple, vigorously participating in the ultimate act of affirming life, convey a strong, insistent, vital urge to the goddess. They pump her with energy, as it were. And at the top, like an overflowing fountain, her blood spurts from her severed neck, the life force leaving her, but streaming into the mouths of her devotees \(and into her own mouth\) to nourish and sustain them.51 The cycle is starkly portrayed: life \(the lovemaking couple\), death \(the decapitated goddess\), and nourishment \(the flanking *yoginīs* drinking her blood\).

The images of most fierce goddesses, such as Kālī, show the goddess severing the heads of others and demanding their blood as nourishment. The practice of sacrificing one’s head to a goddess, usually Durgā or Kālī,52 is also often attested in Indian literature and art. The message \(or at least one of the messages\) is that the goddess, representing the vital forces of the cosmos, needs regular nourishment; sacrificing oneself to her is a way of acknowledging that one is obliged to give life back to her because one has received life from her. These images convey the truth that the goddess is ever hungry and demands blood in order to remain satisfied.



Chinnamastā. Contemporary. First published in *L’Art du Mithila* \(Paris: Les Presses de la Connaissance/Editions sous le Vent, 1985\). Reprinted by permission of Editions sous le Vent.

The Chinnamastā image reverses these images but ultimately teaches the same truth. Chinnamastā is shown not taking or receiving the heads or blood of others but taking her own head and drinking her own blood. She is shown being nourished or sustained not by death \(or sacrifice\) but by the copulating couple beneath her. She is shown not being fed by her devotees but feeding them with her blood. Chinnamastā, however, does not teach different truths from those conveyed by Kālī and Durgā. She simply represents the alternate phase of an ever-recurring sequence. The cosmic process, the rhythms of creation and destruction, the universal economy, is a harmonious alternation of giving and taking, of life and death. Kālī’s need for blood, or conversely the ever-fecund, ever-bountiful giving of goddesses such as Annapūrṇā or śatākṣī, represents only one aspect of the process of giving and taking. Chinnamastā, in her shocking way, presents both aspects together and in such a way that the viewer can grasp the interconnectedness of the different stages in the process. Chinnamastā takes life and vigor from the copulating couple, then gives it away lavishly by cutting off her own head to feed her devotees. Such is the way of things in a world where life must be sustained by organic matter, where metabolism is maintained only by ingesting the corpses of other beings.

The image of Chinnamastā, like the formula of the ten Mahāvidyās itself, does not seem to be very old. The *Sādhanamālā*, containing a description of the headless Vajrayoginī, probably dates to not much later than the twelfth century, and mention of the Hindu ten Mahāvidyās is even more recent than that.53 It has been suggested, however, that Chinnamastā may have earlier prototypes in India.54 Several examples have been discovered in India of nude goddesses squatting or with their thighs spread to display their sexual organs. These figures, some very ancient, often have their arms raised above their bodies and are headless or faceless. Their headless condition is not the result of subsequent damage but an intentional part of the image. The combination of nudity and headlessness, it has been suggested, suffices to indicate that the Chinnamastā figure may have some roots in this more ancient figure.55

These early nude figures, however, are particularly one-sided in what they convey. The arresting iconographic feature of these images is their sexual organs, which are openly displayed. If the headlessness of the figures suggests death, it lacks the force of the Chinnamastā icon. More likely, the headlessness of the nude figures simply focuses attention on their physiology. Although the Chinnamastā image includes an emphasis on sexual vigor, life, and nourishment, the central theme is the shocking self-decapitation.

Other nude goddess figures have been suggested as possible prototypes of Chinnamastā. One of these is the fierce, disheveled goddess Koṭavī. Koṭavī is usually associated with battlefields and is sometimes included among lists of the Mātṛkās.56 She sometimes is an opponent of Viṣṇu, and in the *Viṣṇu-purāṇa* \(5.32–33\) and *Bhāgavata-purāṇa* \(10.63.20\) she is described as naked, disheveled, and of such an awful appearance that Viṣṇu has to turn his head away from her lest he become incensed by her. In this myth she tries to protect the demon Bānāsura, who is her son in the *Bhāgavata-purāṇa* account. Although descriptions of Koṭavī emphasize her nudity and her wild appearance, she seems very different in character from Chinnamastā. Her typical haunt is the battlefield, not the cremation ground \(although both are places of death\), and she seems to be a fierce demoness whose primary role is to terrify or distract enemies during battle. Her character is usually malevolent, while Chinnamastā’s character, although fierce perhaps, is not said to be malevolent.

A South Indian hunting goddess called Koṟṟavai is similar in name and character to Koṭavī. She is fierce, bloodthirsty, and wild. Again, it has been suggested that she may be another expression of the type of goddess that inspired Chinnamastā.57 J. N. Tiwari sums up her nature.



. . . Koṟṟavai was perhaps the earliest and the most widely worshipped goddess of the ancient Dravidian people. She was essentially a goddess of the semi-nomadic hunting tribes of South India who invoked her for success in cattle-raids and appeased her with bloody sacrifices. As presented in the Tamil heroic poems, there is no marked element of fertility in the character of Koṟṟavai, who remains primarily a goddess of war and victory.58

The Chinnamastā image is striking primarily because her self-decapitation rivets the viewer’s attention. She is not a warrior goddess, and unlike Koṟṟavai she does not receive blood sacrifices; rather, she gives her own blood to her devotees. Although Tiwari is to be commended for drawing our attention to the nude, squatting goddesses and to the naked, fierce goddesses Koṭavī and Koṟṟavai, for each of whom he gives a thorough description from many and differing sources, none of the figures seems to be overwhelmingly similar to Chinnamastā. There are many goddesses and demonesses in the Hindu tradition who haunt battlefields, are nude, are fierce and bloodthirsty in nature, or have a clear association with fertility. Chinnamastā, however, seems to be the only goddess who decapitates herself in order to nourish her devotees.

Although Chinnamastā is easily recognized by most Hindus and although her image, along with the other Mahāvidyās, is fairly common in goddess temples, she is not popularly worshiped by most Hindus. She is almost always associated with heroic, Tantric religious practice. The only temple dedicated to Chinnamastā that I have been able to locate is in the courtyard of a large Durgā temple in Rāmnagar across the Ganges River from Banaras. The priests at the Durgā temple told me that the temple had been established by a Tantric *sādhu* and that the people who worshiped the image were primarily Tantrics in pursuit of *siddhis* or supernatural powers.



